# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/67/Brooks et al. - 2020 - The Platform Vector Gene Therapies Project Increasing the Efficiency of Adeno-Associated Virus Gene.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

SPECIAL REPORT
The Platform Vector Gene Therapies Project:
Increasing the Efﬁciency of Adeno-Associated Virus
Gene Therapy Clinical Trial Startup
Philip J. Brooks,1,* Elizabeth A. Ottinger, 2 Deanna Portero,1 Richa Madan Lomash, 2
Asaf Alimardanov,2 Pramod Terse,2 Xin Xu,2 Randy J. Chandler, 3 Janelle Geist Hauserman, 4
Eric Esposito,4 Carsten G. Bo¨ nnemann,4 Charles P. Venditti, 3 Christopher P. Austin, 5
Anne Pariser,1 and Donald C. Lo 2; for the NIH PaVe-GT Team {
1Ofﬁce of Rare Disease Research, 2Therapeutic Development Branch, and 5Ofﬁce of the Director, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS);
3Organic Acid Research Section, Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI); 4Neuromuscular
and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS); National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
{See Acknowledgments section.
INTRODUCTION
THERE ARE AN estimated 7,000–10,000 different rare dis-
eases that impact the human population.1 Around 85% of
rare diseases ( *6,500 diseases) are thought to be mono-
genic disorders, which are diseases caused by mutations in
a single gene, with this number increasing by about 200
newly identiﬁed diseases each year.
2 With recent advances
in medical science and biotechnology, and several recent
approvals for gene therapies and hundreds more in clinical
development, highly efﬁcacious disease-modifying ther-
apies and, potentially, cures for most rare monogenic dis-
eases are becoming a real possibility. However, given that
only about 5% of rare diseases currently have a speciﬁc
regulatorily approved treatment, at the current pace of
only three to ﬁve rare diseases having a ﬁrst speciﬁc
treatment approved each year, some 2,000 years would be
required for speciﬁc treatments for all rare monogenetic
disorders to be developed. In fact, many rare monogenetic
diseases might never have potentially curative therapeu-
tics approved despite promising therapeutic opportunities,
because the traditional one-disease-at-a-time model of
commercial therapeutic research and development is too
inefﬁcient to justify developing therapeutics for popula-
tion sizes below a certain threshold.
Because so many rare monogenic diseases are life-
limiting conditions, efﬁcacious therapies are urgently
needed now. To meaningfully change the current trajec-
tory of rare disease therapeutics development, what is
needed are not incremental one-disease-at-a-time ap-
proaches, but rather a fundamentally different many-
diseases-at-a-time approach that focuses on biological and
modality-relevant commonalities across different diseases.
For monogenic diseases caused by recessive mutations
leading to a loss of function, there is, at least in principle,
a clear therapeutic strategy. Speciﬁcally, introducing a
working copy of the defective gene (with appropriate reg-
ulatory elements) into the clinically relevant cell type(s),
at the right time in development and disease progression,
should result in either an amelioration, cure, or even pre-
vention of the disease. For many years, the limiting factor
in gene therapy has been the ability to effectively deliver
therapeutic genes into target cells.
However, for some cell and tissue types, this roadblock
has largely been overcome by adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vectors. Studies in mice, nonhuman primates, and
humans have shown that AAV vectors can effectively
deliver therapeutic genes to target cells in muscle, liver,
and brain, among other target organs. The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) has now approved gene ther-
apy products for treating an RPE65 mutation-associated
retinal disease, Leber congenital amaurosis,
3 and a neuro-
degenerative disease, spinal muscular atrophy.4
AAV vectors have been administered in an estimated
250–300 clinical trials and have had a good overall safety
record to date in human patients.5 However, the results of
a study using an AAV vector in children with X-linked
*Correspondence: Dr. Philip J. Brooks, Ofﬁce of Rare Disease Research, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), National Ins titutes of Health, 6701
Democracy Boulevard, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. E-mail: pjbrooks@mail.nih.gov
ª Philip J. Brooks et al. , 2020; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original wor k is properly cited.
1034 j HUMAN GENE THERAPY, VOLUME 31, NUMBERS 19 and 20 DOI: 10.1089/hum.2020.259
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.



--- Page 2 ---

myotubular myopathy (XMTM) should be noted.
Although early results continue to indicate a clear clinical
beneﬁt after gene therapy, the recent reports of the deaths
of three boys in the high-dose group in this trial raise
obvious safety concerns. Although more details surround-
ing the clinical events and laboratory parameters will need
to be investigated, it has been suggested that the deaths
were inﬂuenced by a combination of a high total vector
dose (which was based on total body weight), as well as an
interaction with pre-existing cholestatic liver disease, a
recognized hepatic manifestation of XMTM, which was
irreversibly exacerbated after the high vector load to the
liver.
6 Even if a predisposing risk factor partly underlies
the lethal outcome experienced by these boys, the spec-
trum of side effects noted in the XMTM trial illustrate the
limitations of our current knowledge in being able to
predict adverse effects of AAV gene therapy across rare
diseases.
AAV vectors are intrinsically disease-agnostic in the
sense that their applicability for a particular disease is
governed more by their biodistribution as a function of
capsid serotype, route of administration and dose, the
genetic mechanism to address (for instance, loss of func-
tion versus gain of function), and the expression cassette
used, rather than by pathophysiological speciﬁcs of the
disease under consideration. Thus, by putting different
therapeutic genes within a chosen AAV capsid, different
AAV-mediated gene therapies can be produced to treat
different diseases. This modularity of function facilitates
the swapping of transgenes, selection of regulatory ele-
ments (enhancer, promoter, etc.), and alterations of the
capsid, which allow different tissues and cell types to be
targeted. As such, AAV as a vector is fundamentally a
platform modality
5: a programmable multipurpose vehicle
that can be used to deliver a variety of different therapeutic
payloads to disease-relevant cells. From this we can also
hypothesize that the more similar a group of diseases are in
terms of their target cells and genetic mechanism, the more
streamlined the modular approach can be conceived of.
In contrast to the inherent platform potential of AAV
vectors, AAV clinical development to date has not prior-
itized maximizing the efﬁciency of the AAV platform.
This one-disease-at-a-time approach to clinical develop-
ment does not fully leverage the platform capacity of AAV
vectors, capitalize on any commonalities in preclinical
development, or promote sharing of knowledge across
individual therapeutic programs. This results in duplica-
tion of effort, as well as suboptimal use of time, funding,
animals, and other scarce resources.
An important consideration for choosing diseases for
commercial therapeutics development is disease preva-
lence, which results in a focus on diseases that affect a
relatively larger numbers of patients and thus present
larger market sizes. However, roughly 80% of rare dis-
eases affect <1 person per million
7 and this very low
prevalence serves to limit commercial attention to devel-
oping treatments for the majority of rare monogenic
diseases.
This lack of commercial viability of many rare disease
therapeutics is exacerbated by the fact that gene therapies,
in contrast to small molecule drugs and antisense oligo-
nucleotides, are designed to be one-time treatments. This
means that patients who participate in gene therapy clin-
ical trials cannot also be consumers of these therapies
should they receive marketing approval.
Collectively, the constraints of the current development
model present formidable challenges to the creation of
scientiﬁcally practical and medically needed gene re-
placement therapies for rare diseases. This is an acute
problem because the scientiﬁc rationale and clinical im-
petus for the application of gene therapy to monogenic
diseases is independent of disease prevalence. As such,
therapies for numerous very low prevalence monogenic
disorders are currently scientiﬁcally feasible but cannot
move forward due to operational and ﬁnancial consider-
ations. The biggest hurdle remains traversing the path
between proof-of-concept (POC) data in an animal model
to the opening of a clinical trial. In the absence of com-
mercial interest, the costs and burden of developing gene
therapies for noncommercially viable diseases often fall to
patients and their families, who are usually not prepared
for such a responsibility, either in terms of scientiﬁc
training, regulatory experience, or access to ﬁnancial sup-
port. This reality also has the unfortunate effect of re-
sulting in disparities in access to gene therapy trials based
not on scientiﬁc considerations, but socioeconomic and
other factors.
To address this operational problem, the U.S. National
Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences (NCATS), in collaboration with
the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke (NINDS) and the National Human Genome Re-
search Institute (NHGRI), have initiated the Platform
Vector Gene Therapy (PaVe-GT) pilot project. PaVe-GT
seeks to increase the efﬁciency of clinical therapeutics
development and trial startup by multiplexing preclinical
and clinical development and freely disseminating the
information gained on the PaVe-GT website: https://pave-
gt.ncats.nih.gov/. PaVe-GT is an experimental transla-
tional science initiative that aims to leverage the power of
platform vectors and disease relatedness to help deliver on
the promise of gene therapy to patients with rare diseases
of no commercial interest.
WHAT IS P AVE-GT?
PaVe-GT is a pilot project whose main goal is to test
whether the efﬁciency of gene therapy development and
clinical testing can be substantially increased by using
a standardized process for four different rare diseases.
THE P AVE-GT PROJECT 1035


--- Page 3 ---

PaVe-GT will use the same AAV serotype, AAV-9, as a
platform vector to develop gene therapy products for all
four diseases (Fig. 1). AAV-9 was selected for this project
because of its broad cell and tissue tropism, including
the liver, muscle, and central nervous system (CNS). The
AAV-9 vector used in clinical trials here will be produced
in the same manufacturing facility, using the same pro-
duction and puriﬁcation methods, with the only difference
being the therapeutic gene constructs. Although POC
studies will be conducted individually for the selected
disorders, we hypothesize that additional efﬁciencies will
be gained in the biodistribution studies and potentially,
toxicology, as the preclinical testing advances.
In clinical research, the term platform is used in mul-
tiple different ways. Therefore, it is important to clearly
distinguish clinical development based on a platform viral
vector (as used here) versus a platform clinical trial. A
platform clinical trial has generally been deﬁned as a
durable infrastructure to support the testing of multiple
treatments across one or more types of diseases or patient
Figure 1. PaVe-GT development process overview. (a) Traditional one-disease-at-a-time approach: The development process for the four diseases/genes
under study would proceed from bottom to top through each of the CMC, preclinical, and clinical phases separately with no leveraging of resources from one
disease-program to another, and resulting in separate clinical trials. No resource savings would be expected from this approach. (b) PaVe-GT many-diseases-
at-a-time approach: PaVe-GT seeks to leverage available information from each of the four related programs to others with the hypothesis that time an d
resources can be saved in the CMC, preclinical, and clinical phases. From bottom to top, expected resource savings (indicated by progressively small er text
boxes) beginning in vector product characterization, biodistribution, and toxicology phases. In the clinical phase, each of the two therapeutic-d isease areas for
the organic acidemias and NMJ diseases can be grouped into master protocols rather than being performed as separate trials. CMC, chemistry, manu-
facturing, and controls; NMJ, neuromuscular junction; PaVe-GT, Platform Vector Gene Therapy.
1036 BROOKS ET AL.


--- Page 4 ---

populations.8 By using a platform, patients with a hetero-
geneous disease (such as cancers) can be treated in parallel
or sequentially with different candidate therapeutics under
a ‘‘master protocol’’ without the need to reassemble clin-
ical trial infrastructure to test each product, as well as
offering the possibility of treatment to a broader cohort of
patients.
Master protocols are generally deﬁned as a framework
under which multiple drug studies are operated under one
overarching protocol.
8 To date, clinical trial platforms
and master protocols have most commonly been used in
oncology indications, although they have substantial po-
tential for rare monogenic diseases as well. In PaVe-GT,
the main focus is on the beneﬁts resulting from the use of
a platform AAV vector. However, PaVe-GT also plans to
incorporate clinical trial platform concepts, including
the use of master protocols to evaluate the AAV gene
therapies in phenotypically related diseases. Speciﬁcally,
although we are studying four different diseases, we will
have two clinical trial protocols; one for the organic
acidemias, and one for the congenital myasthenic syn-
dromes (CMS) (Fig. 1b).
The PaVe-GT project was conceived to openly share
project results and lessons learned with the research and
patient communities in such a way that the information
could be useful to any party interested in developing a
subsequent gene therapy using an identical or similar ap-
proach. Information and results from the program will
be made publicly available on the PaVe-GT website in as
timely a manner as possible, including POC, toxicology
and biodistribution data, Investigational New Drug (IND)
ﬁlings and communications with the FDA, and other study
documents.
We note some limitations to the PaVe-GT approach.
For this pilot project, an independent contract manufac-
turing facility will perform the manufacturing of the AAV
vector. NIH will not have access to proprietary aspects
of that manufacturing process and, therefore, will not be
able to share that information with the public. The PaVe-
GT project will attempt to identify an equivalent widely
accessible manufacturing process with meaningful free-
dom to operate. Therefore, it is possible but not guaranteed
that future independent gene therapy projects will be able
to reuse PaVe-GT data in their INDs. Another limita-
tion relates to the generalizability of the PaVe-GT project
management approach and strategies. Although it is an-
ticipated that ﬁrst-time gene therapy developers in the
research and patient communities will be able to learn a
great deal from the PaVe-GT model of project manage-
ment, there may be some elements of project planning and
coordination that are not generalizable, because of unique
limitations and opportunities speciﬁc to the Federal gov-
ernment. However, the POC data and approach, toxicol-
ogy and biodistribution data, the IND ﬁlings and our
communications with the FDA that will be made public
should beneﬁt many stakeholders interested in AAV gene
therapy trials, particularly new groups developing gene
therapies for diseases of no commercial interest. In addi-
tion, the PaVe-GT approach should also generate valuable
data regarding payload-independent safety concerns,
which will also be put into the public domain as soon as
possible to beneﬁt other AAV clinical trial efforts (see
Morales et al.
9).
DISEASE SELECTION PROCESS
In principle, almost any monogenic disease that is ame-
nable to AAV-based delivery could have been included in
PaVe-GT. The four diseases that will be targeted in PaVe-
GT were selected based on practical and budgetary
considerations. Since PaVe-GT is a pilot program, by
deﬁnition, it implies a high degree of programmatic risk
so it was decided to conduct the program within the NIH
Intramural Research Program (IRP). This allows the pro-
gram to leverage the unique clinical research resources
available at the NIH Clinical Center, facilitate institutional
communication, and streamline project startup. Second,
diseases that were already under study by investigators
within the NIH IRP, and were amenable to AAV gene
therapy, were selected. Importantly, the investigators also
have long experience with clinical trials in rare diseases,
including gene therapies, and have already developed
clinical outcome measures based on natural history stud-
ies, which can be leveraged for this project. Third, working
with investigators who are all Federal employees facili-
tates the goal of making all data public, by simplifying
considerations regarding intellectual property that could
have introduced delays and complications. Finally, at the
time of disease selection, we were not able to identify any
commercial interest in any of diseases under study in
PaVe-GT. It is important to emphasize that although the
PaVe-GT pilot is limited to four diseases, these were ex-
plicitly chosen as demonstration cases and it is our hope
that the data and ﬁndings will be useful to others devel-
oping AAV gene therapies for other rare monogenetic
diseases.
DISEASES UNDER STUDY
The rare monogenic diseases selected include two
organic acidemias and two CMS. The organic acidemias
under study are propionic acidemia (PA) (caused by
propionyl-CoA carboxylase A [PCCA] deﬁciency) and
isolated methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) (cobalamin
type B MMA [MMAB] deﬁciency). The CMS under study
are downstream of tyrosine kinase 7 (DOK7) deﬁciency
and collagen Q (COLQ) deﬁciency.
Organic acidemias
PA caused by PCCA deﬁciency. PA is a rare in-
herited autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by
THE P AVE-GT PROJECT 1037


--- Page 5 ---

a deﬁciency in propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC) ac-
tivity10 (Fig. 2). Patients diagnosed with PA typically pres-
ent in the early newborn period with a metabolic crisis,
which may manifest as vomiting, seizures, lethargy,
hypotonia, and encephalopathy. These symptoms may be
recurrent, with episodes triggered by feeding or infection,
and can result in permanent neurological damage and may
be fatal if not promptly recognized and treated.
The current management of PA relies upon dietary
restriction of branch chain amino acid precursors, carni-
tine supplementation, and aggressive management dur-
ing episodes of intercurrent infections and stress. Despite
vigilant monitoring and proactive medical management,
patients can suffer from metabolic decompensations, hy-
perammonemia, pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, sudden
death from ventricular arrhythmia, strokes of the basal
ganglia, poor growth, cytopenias, and renal disease.
11 The
severe disease burden, high rates of morbidity and mor-
tality, and poor quality of life experienced by PA pa-
tients have led to the use of elective liver transplantation
as a surgical treatment for PA, to restore PCC activity
and ameliorate or eliminate disease-related symptoms.
Figure 2. Propionate and cobalamin metabolism. The organic acidemias under study in PaVe-GT are PA caused by mitochondrial-localized PCCA deﬁciency, 7
an enzyme responsible for conversion of propionyl-CoA to D-methylmalonyl-CoA, and isolated MMA MMAB caused by cobalamin B deﬁciency 14 (PCCA and
MMAB indicated by red asterisks). PCC deﬁciency (caused by PCCA or PCCB deﬁciency, both of which occur with equal frequencies) results in elevated levels
of toxic propionyl-CoA derived from metabolism of some amino acids (isoleucine, valine, threonine, and methionine), propionate from gut ﬂora, chol esterol and
odd-chain fatty acids, which contribute to the production of propionyl-CoA. MMAB is one of several enzymes involved in the conversion of vitamin B12 t o5 ¢-
deoxyadenosylcobalamin, the active cofactor required by the mitochondrial enzyme MMUT to function in the conversion of L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-
CoA. Isolated MMA due to enzyme or cofactor deﬁciencies lead to elevations in methylmalonic acid. Similar to PA, patients with MMA are unable to metabo lize
certain amino acids and lipids. MMA, methylmalonic acidemia; MMAB, cobalamin type B MMA; MMUT, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase; PA, propionic acidemia;
PCC, propionyl-CoA carboxylase; PCCA, propionyl-CoA carboxylase A; PCCB, propionyl-CoA carboxylase B.
1038 BROOKS ET AL.


--- Page 6 ---

The use of expanded newborn screening to detect PA
patients in the neonatal period adds another dimension of
urgency to the development of new therapies for PA. AAV
gene therapy is a potentially promising new therapy for
which preclinical studies using various murine models of
PA caused by PCCA deﬁciency have demonstrated a
therapeutic beneﬁt.
12,13 In addition, a natural history study
of PA is underway at the NIH (https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT02890342).
MMA (caused by MMAB deﬁciency). Isolated
MMA is a group of heterogenous metabolic disorder most
commonly caused by complete or partial deﬁciency of the
mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase or a
defect in the transport or synthesis of its cofactor, 5 ¢-
deoxyadenosylcobalamin
14 (Fig. 2). The cobalamin B
type of MMA is caused by mutations in the MMAB gene
and it is one of the rarest forms of MMA. The cobalamin B
type of MMA is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner and can be detected by newborn screening, and
then conﬁrmed by genetic testing. Patients with the co-
balamin B type of MMA experience severe symptoms,
which can appear in early infancy or the ﬁrst year of life, of
acid–base imbalance, high levels of ammonia, lethargy,
vomiting, dehydration, hypotonia, and delayed develop-
ment. Long-term complications include kidney disease,
pancreatitis, cytopenias, and neurological damage from
metabolic strokes of the basal ganglia.
There is no cure for the cobalamin B type of MMA, but
treatments include dietary restriction of protein, vitamin
B12 given as an injection, carnitine, and intermittent an-
tibiotics. Despite medical and dietary management, these
patients can experience signiﬁcant medical complications
that underscore the need for new therapies. Preclinical
AAV gene therapy has been used successfully to treat
mouse models of MMA
15 caused by mutations in a related
gene (Mmut), and by extension, is predicted to be equally
effective for the treatment of the cobalamin B type of
MMA. The NIH currently is conducting a natural history
study of MMA, which has enrolled >200 participants
(https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00078078).
It is anticipated that the platform design of PaVe-GT
will also be beneﬁcial for other forms of PA and MMA,
given the nature of the enzyme defects and metabolic
pathway, and if successful, may enable a master treatment
protocol.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes
CMS are a group of inherited disorders in which there is
impairment of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) caused
by pathogenic genetic variants in many of the molecular
components that make up the NMJ
16,17 (Fig. 3). Although
dominantly acting forms exist, most types are inherited in
an autosomal recessive pattern with early onset and loss
of function as the mechanism, making them amendable
to gene replacement approaches. The NMJ as a specialized
structure has been extensively investigated; its molecular
composition, morphology, and physiology are well un-
derstood, including the regulation of NMJ-speciﬁc gene
expression.
CMS are rare, affecting less than nine in one mil-
lion children depending on the population.
15 Although
symptoms vary depending on the underlying cause of
the disease, they may include muscle and respiratory
weakness, eyelid drooping and problems with eye align-
ment, delayed motor development, excessive activity
induced weakness (muscle fatigue), contractures, and
skeletal deformities.
Clinical consequences of NMJ dysfunction are quanti-
ﬁable by a number of outcome measures, making the NMJ
a prime candidate to study the clinical beneﬁts of gene
therapy. In addition, since these disorders are not primarily
degenerative, as nerve and muscle integrity are largely
maintained, restoration of function to the neuromuscular
unit should be achievable.
DOK7 and COLQ deﬁciency. The two forms of
CMS chosen for the PaVe-GT initiative are DOK7 and
COLQ deﬁciency. These two forms account for about 20%
of CMS cases combined.
18 The DOK7 gene encodes for
DOK7 protein, which is essential for postsynaptic spe-
cialization of the NMJ.19,20 CMS linked to DOK7 variants
is most often inherited recessively and may result from
missense, nonsense, splice site, and/or frameshifts muta-
tions. Although many different CMS types share general
phenotypic characteristics, DOK7-deﬁciency patients of-
ten present with delayed motor milestones, difﬁculty
walking at disease onset, and some report facial and bulbar
weakness. However, ﬂuctuation of weakness and fatiga-
bility may be much less prominent compared with other
forms of CMS or only apparent over longer periods of
time.
21 Thus, this condition may be mistaken for a ﬁxed
myopathy rather than a CMS, which may delay diagnosis.
Despite this, no obvious correlation of clinical symp-
toms and location of mutations with the gene have been
established.
COLQ is a speciﬁc nonﬁbrillar collagen encoded by
the COLQ gene, which anchors acetylcholine esterase
(AChE) in the basal lamina of the mammalian NMJ.
22
One end of COLQ binds to AChE, whereas the opposite
end binds to muscle-speciﬁc tyrosine kinase at the post-
synaptic membrane. Similar to DOK7 deﬁciency, the
earliest symptoms are detected in the neonatal period
or during childhood and include muscle hypotonia,
fatigue, respiratory insufﬁciency, and delayed motor
development.
Although pyridostigmine is routinely used for acquired
myasthenia gravis and recessive ACHE mutations that
cause CMS, this treatment is not usually effective in
CMS resulting from COLQ or DOK7 mutations, and may
THE P AVE-GT PROJECT 1039


--- Page 7 ---

worsen symptoms.23 In addition, there are varied responses
to other treatments, such as salbutamol. 24 Of particular
relevance to PaVe-GT, preclinical POC studies have been
published supporting the use of AAV gene therapy in a
mouse model of DOK7 deﬁciency,
25 and a COLQ knock-
out animal model is available.26
PROJECT MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES
AND STRATEGY
Building and implementing processes to bring innova-
tive solutions into practice to solve translational prob-
lems is a collaborative effort requiring tightly coordinated
teamwork, and is a central ‘‘translational science’’ prob-
lem as NCATS deﬁnes it.
27 A key component is the as-
sembly of a cohesive group of people, including scientists,
clinicians, and regulators with different areas of expertise
such as assay development, in vitro and in vivo pharma-
cology, formulation, manufacturing, and toxicology with a
shared vision and goals, and most importantly, a willing-
ness to work together and to openly share ideas, critical
tools, and data to meet the projects’ goals. The critical
ﬁrst step after assembly of the team is establishing the goals
of the program, developing an agreed upon research plan
that serves as a roadmap for the studies, and outlining re-
sources needed to accomplish the plan, from preclinical to
clinical phases, assigning roles and responsibilities for
each collaborator, and establishing initial timelines.
This centralized project management will be key in
driving the PaVe-GT project forward to its end goals, by
Figure 3. Molecular components of the NMJ affected in CMS. CMS are a collection of diseases caused by pathogenic genetic variants in the molecular
components of the NMJ (adapted from 18 and 23). Defects in all areas of the NMJ—including the presynaptic cell (nerve), synaptic cleft and postsynaptic cell
(muscle)—have been causatively linked to the development of CMS, with several of these genes indicated in the ﬁgure ( within black boxes ; distribution of
genes causatively linked to CMS within box 18). The two forms of CMS chosen for the PaVe-GT initiative are DOK7 and COLQ deﬁciencies (appear in red text
within black boxes). DOK7 functions primarily to activate MuSK, which allows for the subsequent clustering of acetylcholine receptors in postsynaptic muscle
cells.19 COLQ is a speciﬁc nonﬁbrillar collagen, which anchors AChE in the basal lamina of the mammalian NMJ. 22 Without proper function these proteins in
patients with CMS, NMJ signaling is altered. AChE, acetylcholine esterase; CMS, congenital myasthenic syndromes; COLQ, collagen Q; DOK7, downstre am of
tyrosine kinase 7; MuSK, muscle-speciﬁc tyrosine kinase.
1040 BROOKS ET AL.


--- Page 8 ---

ensuring the necessary resources are available, tracking
activities and studies, monitoring overall project costs, and
fostering the cohesive team environment. For this purpose,
NCATS utilizes project managers with relevant scientiﬁc
expertise in preclinical development. Their role is to un-
derstand both the scientiﬁc and strategic goals of the
project so that they can proactively and effectively coor-
dinate and prioritize the sharing of critical information,
track progression of the project milestones, and quickly
respond appropriately if roadblocks arise during the im-
plementation of the project. They create a strong collab-
orative team network, stemming from commitment and
passion by every member of the team, who has to be
proactive, responsive, and follow through on action items
and deliverables on time to support successful execution
of the overall strategy. In turn, the team needs to be ﬂex-
ible to address unexpected data results or mitigate prob-
lems encountered along the way to be able to adapt and
make changes to the project plan. Thus, tight coordination
and effective communication among stakeholders are
essential for all the ‘‘moving parts’’ in a very complex
process to come together to facilitate a successful project
outcome, particularly in a multilateral noncommercial
setting. As such, PaVe-GT will aim to provide a useful
blueprint for managing gene therapy product development
and testing, sharing information, best practices, and les-
sons learned along the way with the public in an open
forum that will help others to follow the path and decrease
their burden to achieving gene therapy especially for rare
diseases with small numbers of patients.
FDA ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY
Engaging FDA as a research partner is an essential el-
ement of the PaVe-GT project design. The NIH PaVe-GT
team initially engaged FDA Center for Biologics Evalu-
ation and Research (CBER) for nonbinding discussion of
the general PaVe-GT concept, including the acceptability
of developing and clinically testing four gene therapies for
four diseases in a standardized process, exploring mech-
anisms for seamless information sharing between gene
therapy applications, such as the use of master ﬁles, and
hearing FDA’s concerns regarding maintaining high-
quality science in an expedited program.
Given the thousands of rare monogenic disorders, and the
largely unmet medical needs of the rare disease patients, as
communicated to NIH in these discussions as well as in
public meetings, FDA CBER has voiced their support for
designing programs that will get more efﬁcacious therapies
to more patients quickly without compromising safety, even
in very small patient populations.
28
FDA has also published guidances for gene therapy
programs on a variety of topics (https://www.fda.gov/
vaccines-blood-biologics/bio logics-guidances/cellular-
gene-therapy- guidances). Importantly, these guidances
urge frequent high-quality communications between gene
therapy sponsors and regulators at all steps of the devel-
opment process starting with early phase INitial Targeted
Engagement for Regulatory Advice on CBER producTs
(INTERACT) meetings.
An essential aspect of PaVe-GT will be making avail-
able, in as near real time as possible, all written commu-
nications with FDA. The purpose of this is to inform rare
disease stakeholders of questions, responses, and advice
we have received, and to provide real examples of FDA
interactions, especially for those less experienced in drug
development science and processes. From our discussions
to date, FDA has indicated that they are highly support-
ive of our approach and NCATS’ plan for information
sharing.
CONCLUSION
The scientiﬁc rationale for AAV gene therapy in nu-
merous monogenic diseases is well founded, and the tools
and expertise to develop and implement clinical devel-
opment programs are currently within reach for many
of these disorders. However, despite these scientiﬁc ad-
vances, due mainly to ﬁnancial considerations, most
commercial AAV development efforts will likely focus
on the most prevalent rare diseases. Thousands of non-
commercially viable rare diseases may thus remain ‘‘or-
phaned’’ despite the existence of tools with signiﬁcant
potential to meaningful alter the course of these diseases.
Rare monogenic diseases are not, in fact, rare given the
large number of diseases and, collectively, the large
number of patients affected. Monogenic disorders, by
deﬁnition, are diseases that one is born with, and dispro-
portionately affect young children. Ameliorating and
preventing adverse metabolic and developmental conse-
quences in children born with what should now be con-
sidered treatable conditions adds to the sense of urgency
for and the need to radically alter the current trajectory of
rare disease therapeutics development. NIH is the world’s
largest public research agency and fostering innovative
research strategies to improve health is one of its main
goals (https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/mission-
goals). The PaVe-GT project is intended to advance
beyond the one-disease-at-a-time paradigm typically fol-
lowed for rare diseases, by testing how much we can in-
crease the efﬁciency of new gene therapy development
and clinical testing by explicitly taking advantage of the
platform capacity of AAV vectors with the larger intention
of having more gene therapies becoming operationally
feasible in the near-term, especially for these very low
prevalence disorders. A key aspect of PaVe-GT is to dis-
seminate program results and regulatory documents as
broadly as possible, with the ultimate goal of beneﬁting
future gene therapy clinical development programs for
diseases of no apparent commercial interest.
THE P AVE-GT PROJECT 1041


--- Page 9 ---

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the entire NIH PaVe-GT Team: Gilberto V.
Averion, Krishna Balakrishnan, Steven J. Burden, Eg-
gerton Campbell, Catherine Chen, Claire Driscoll, Oksana
Dukhanina, Susan Ferry, A. Reghan Foley, Lina Li, Irini
Manoli, Christopher Mendoza, Julien Oury, Forbes D.
Porter, Lili Portilla, Dimah Saade, Oleg A. Shchelochkov,
Jennifer L. Sloan, Joshua Todd, London Toney, Carol Van
Ryzin, Sury Vepa, Erik Wagner, and Amy Wang.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURE
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
FUNDING INFORMATION
PaVe-GT is funded by the NCATS Cures Acceleration
Network. R.J.C. and C.P.V are supported by the In-
tramural Research Program of the NHGRI, NIH. C.G.B,
J.G.H, and E.E are supported by the Intramural Research
Program of the NINDS, NIH.
REFERENCES
1. Haendel M, Vasilevsky N, Unni D, et al. How
many rare diseases are there? Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2020;19:77–78.
2. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man /C210 : An Online
Catalog of Human Genes and Genetic Disorders.
https://www.omim.org/ (accessed October 12,
2020).
3. Ciulla TA, Hussain RM, Berrocal AM, et al. Vor-
etigene neparvovec-rzyl for treatment of RPE65-
mediated inherited retinal diseases: a model for
ocular gene therapy development. Expert Opin
Biol Ther 2020;20:565–578.
4. Hoy SM. Onasemnogene Abeparvovec: ﬁrst Global
Approval. Drugs 2019;79:1255–1262.
5. Wang D, Tai PWL, Gao G. Adeno-associated virus
vector as a platform for gene therapy delivery.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2019;18:358–378.
6. Shieh PB, Bonnemann CG, Muller-Felber W, et al.
Re: ‘‘Moving forward after two deaths in a gene
therapy trial of myotubular myopathy’’ by Wilson
and Flotte. Hum Gene Ther 2020;31:787.
7. Nguengang Wakap S, Lambert DM, Olry A, et al.
Estimating cumulative point prevalence of rare
diseases: analysis of the Orphanet database. Eur
J Hum Genet 2020;28:165–173.
8. Renfro LA, Sargent DJ. Statistical controversies in
clinical research: basket trials, umbrella trials, and
other master protocols: a review and examples.
Ann Oncol 2017;28:34–43.
9. Morales L, Gambhir Y, Bennett J, et al. Broader
implications of progressive liver dysfunction and
lethal sepsis in two boys following systemic high-
dose AAV. Mol Ther 2020;28:1753–1755.
10. Shchelochkov OA, Carrillo N, Venditti C. Propionic
acidemia. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA,
et al., eds. GeneReviews
/C210 . Seattle, WA: University
of Washington, Seattle, 1993.
11. Shchelochkov OA, Manoli I, Sloan JL, et al.
Chronic kidney disease in propionic acidemia.
Genet Med 2019;21:2830–2835.
12. Chandler RJ, Chandrasekaran S, Carrillo-Carrasco
N, et al. Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 gene
transfer rescues a neonatal lethal murine model
of propionic acidemia. Hum Gene Ther 2011;22:
477–481.
13. Guenzel AJ, Hofherr SE, Hillestad M, et al. Gen-
eration of a hypomorphic model of propionic
acidemia amenable to gene therapy testing. Mol
Ther 2013;21:1316–1323.
14. Manoli I, Sloan JL, Venditti CP. Isolated methyl-
malonic acidemia. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH,
Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews
/C210 . Seattle,
WA: Ann NY Acad Sci, 1993.
15. Chandler RJ, Venditti CP. Long-term rescue of a
lethal murine model of methylmalonic acidemia
using adeno-associated viral gene therapy. Mol
Ther 2010;18:11–16.
16. Bonnemann CG, Wang CH, Quijano-Roy S, et al.
Diagnostic approach to the congenital muscular
dystrophies. Neuromuscul Disord 2014;24:289–311.
17. Nicole S, Azuma Y, Bauche S, et al. Congenital
myasthenic syndromes or inherited disorders of
neuromuscular transmission: recent discoveries
and open questions. J Neuromuscul Dis 2017;4:
269–284.
18. Maggi L, Bernasconi P, D’Amico A, et al. Italian
recommendations for diagnosis and management
of congenital myasthenic syndromes. Neurol Sci
2019;40:457–468.
19. Bergamin E, Hallock PT, Burden SJ, et al. The
cytoplasmic adaptor protein Dok7 activates the
receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK via dimerization.
Mol Cell 2010;39:100–109.
20. Hallock PT, Xu CF, Park TJ, et al. Dok-7 regulates
neuromuscular synapse formation by recruiting
Crk and Crk-L. Genes Dev 2010;24:2451–2461.
21. Palace J, Lashley D, Newsom-Davis J, et al.
Clinical features of the DOK7 neuromuscular
junction synaptopathy. Brain 2007;130:1507–1515.
22. Sigoillot SM, Bourgeois F, Lambergeon M, et al.
ColQ controls postsynaptic differentiation at the
neuromuscular junction. J Neurosci 2010;30:
13–23.
23. Lee M, Beeson D, Palace J. Therapeutic strate-
gies for congenital myasthenic syndromes. Ann N
Y Acad Sci 2018;1412:129–136.
24. McMacken GM, Spendiff S, Whittaker RG, et al.
Salbutamol modiﬁes the neuromuscular junction
in a mouse model of ColQ myasthenic syndrome.
Hum Mol Genet 2019;28:2339–2351.
25. Arimura S, Okada T, Tezuka T, et al. Neuromus-
cular disease. DOK7 gene therapy beneﬁts mouse
models of diseases characterized by defects in
the neuromuscular junction. Science 2014;345:
1505–1508.
26. Sigoillot SM, Bourgeois F, Karmouch J, et al.
Neuromuscular junction immaturity and muscle
atrophy are hallmarks of the ColQ-deﬁcient
mouse, a model of congenital myasthenic
syndrome with acetylcholinesterase deﬁciency.
FASEB J 2016;30:2382–2399.
27. Austin CP. Translating translation. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2018;17:455–456.
28. Marks P, Witten C. Toward a new framework for
the development of individualized therapies. Gene
Ther 2020. DOI: 10.1038/s41434-020-0143-y
1042 BROOKS ET AL.