# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/78/Kirschner and Cathomen - 2020 - Gene Therapy for Monogenic Inherited Disorders Opportunities and Challenges.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

MEDICINE
Review Article
Gene Therapy for Monogenic  
Inherited Disorders
Opportunities and Challenges
Janbernd Kirschner, Toni Cathomen
S
omatic gene therapy is defined as the addition, re-
moval, or modification of the genetic information 
in a patient’s somatic cells for the purpose of treat-
ing or preventing disease. After decades of research and 
some setbacks, the number of successful and approved 
gene therapeutics has inc reased continually in recent 
years (Figure 1) (1). To date, gene therapy is used pri-
marily in the therapy of monogenic, mostly rare diseases, 
and in malignancies.
Summary
Background: New gene therapy approaches have emerged as promising treatment options for rare congenital disorders and 
certain tumor entities for which previously only procedures of limited curative potential had been available, if at all. 
Methods: Based on a selective literature search, the principles of gene therapy, the current status of clinical application, and the 
methods and results of gene therapy approaches are discussed.
Results: In vivo gene therapy relies mostly on the use of vectors based on modified adeno-associated viruses to introduce a 
functioning copy of the missing or defective genetic information into the target cells. In ex vivo gene therapy, the target cells are 
extracted, genetically modified using a viral vector, and then returned to the patient. Predominantly lentiviral vectors are used for 
this purpose. With regard to monogenic disorders, gene therapies are available for the treatment of patients with severe com-
bined immunodeficiency (ADA-SCID), congenital retinal dystrophy (RPE65 mutations), transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia, 
and spinal muscular atrophy. In spinal muscular atrophy, for example, single-dose in vivo gene therapy leads to progress in 
motor development that could not be expected to occur in the natural course. These effects are particularly pronounced when 
the gene therapy is administered before the onset of symptoms.
Conclusion: The first gene treatments have now been approved and bring hope of long-term therapeutic benefit after a single 
administration. The numbers of patients who come into question for specific therapies are often low, so that many different as-
pects—generation of evidence on efficacy and safety, determini ng indications, performance of the treatment, pricing—bring new 
challenges.
Cite this as:
Kirschner J, Cathomen T:  Gene therapy for monogenic inherited disorders—opportuni ties and challenges.  
Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85. DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2020.0878
Department of Neuro -
pediatrics, University 
Hospital Bonn, Ger-
many: Prof. Dr. med. 
Janbernd Kirschner
Institute for Trans-
fusion Medicine and 
Gene Therapy & 
Center for Chronic 
Immunodeficiency 
(CCI), Medical 
Center-University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany: Prof. Dr. 
phil. Toni Cathomen
Viral vectors are the most commonly used method 
for inserting the genetic information into the target 
cells. This so called transduction can be done ex vivo 
or in vivo ( Figure 2, Box 1). In contrast to germ cell 
therapy, which is prohibited in Germany for ethical 
reasons, in somatic gene therapy the genetic material 
is inserted into differentiated somatic cells or their 
precursors. It is therefore not passed on to the sub -
sequent generation. These therapies are mostly given 
as a single treatment and can occasionally affect the 
disease course in the long term and in a sustained 
way. Because of the novelty and the expense of up to 
2 million Euro, gene therapies are associated with 
particular challenges for the healthcare system. Fur-
thermore, at the time they gain approval, data on long 
term safety and efficacy are often still limited.
In contrast to gene transfer as explained above,   ge-
nome editing aims to correct a disease causing mu-
tation directly in the genome of the affected cells in an 
This article has been cert ified by the North Rhine 
 Academy for Continuing Medica l Education. Participation 
in the CME certification program is possible only over the 
internet: cme.aerzteblatt.de
.  
The deadline for submissions is 20 December 2021.  
cme plus
878 Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85


--- Page 2 ---

MEDICINE
organ. Since the initial description of the CRISPR-
Cas technology in 2012, genome editing with 
 programmable nucleases as evolved at great speed. In 
addition to CRISPR-Cas, two further platforms—zinc 
finger nucleases (ZFNs) and transcription activator-
like effector nucleases (TALENs)—have reached the 
clinical trial stage (2).
This review article describes recent developments 
in gene therapy. First, we identified the gene thera-
peutics approved in Europe and Germany from the 
websites of the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
and the Paul-Ehrlich-Institute ( Table). We then con-
ducted a selective literature search in PubMed with 
the substances and higher-level topics as search 
terms.
Examples of gene therapies in monogenic 
 disorders
The advantage of ex vivo gene therapy lies in the fact 
that the product can and must be characterized in detail 
before the transplantation. The production of geneti-
cally modified cells is therefore subject to extensive 
laws, regulations, and guidelines. For targeted in vivo 
treatment, the logistical hurdles are not quite as steep, 
but suitable methods are required to achieve sufficient 
efficacy in the target organ while simultaneously 
 minimizing the extent of immune reactions and the risk 
of undesirable modifications to the germline. Since in 
most cases, only very few patients are suitable 
 candidates for a specific gene therapy, the numbers of 
patients treated in clinical studies are often small. 
 Furthermore, the fact that the disorders are severe and 
progressive, without any therapeutic alternative, often 
prevents the carrying out of randomized or placebo 
controlled trials, for methodological and ethical 
 reasons. In the following paragraphs we will explain 
important developmental steps relating to individual 
 organs.
Liver (hemophilia)
Hemophilia is a bleeding disorder, in which—because 
of genetic defects—Factor VIII (hemophilia A) or IX 
(hemophilia B) is not produced in sufficient amounts. 
Current therapy consists of lifelong substitution of the 
relevant clotting factors. Initial studies of gene transfer 
date back as far as the 1990s, but the expression of 
 Factor IX was only short-lived, owing to a strong im-
mune response against the adeno-associated virus 
FIGURE 1
 Gene therapeutics in the EU  
The time axis lists all gene therapies (on a grey background) approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMA), as well as selected drugs for 
novel therapies to treat monogenetic disorders that have recognized Priority Medicine (PRIME) status in the EU (38). The PRIME kitemark (*) 
enables the priority development of medical drugs that are considered promising and for which no alternative preparations exist. The figure dis-
plays the applied vector types and the relevant therapeutic genes. The disorder that can be treated with this preparation is given in parentheses 
below. The license for Glybera expired in 2017. LV-ARSA was recommended for approval in October 2020. 
AAV, adeno-associated virus; AAVx, AAV serotype x vector; ABCD1, ATP-binding cassette D1 (cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy); ADA, adenosine 
monophosphate desaminase (ADA deficiency); ARSA, arylsulfatase A (metachromatic leukodystrophy); CD19.CAR, chimeric antigen receptor 
directed against CD19 (CAR-T-cell therapy); CNGB3, cGMP-gated cation channel B3 (achromatopsia); COL7A1; collagen type-7-A1-chain 
 (dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa); FANCA, Fanconi Anemia-Complementation Group A (Fanconi-anemia typ A); FVIII, factor VIII (hemophilia 
A); FIX, factor IX (hemophilia B); γRV, gamma-retroviral vector; HBB, β-globin (β thalassemia); HSV, herpes simplex virus-based vector; LPL, 
 lipoprotein lipase (LPL deficiency); LV, lentiviral vector; MTM1, myotubularin 1 (myotubular myopathy); ODD, orphan drug designation; RPE, 
 retinoid-isomerohydrolase (retinal dystrophy); SGSH, heparan sulfamidase (Sanfilippo disease type A); SMN, survival motor neuron (spinal 
 muscular atrophy)
ex vivo
2007 EU-ODD
LV-ARSA
2016 EMA
Strimvelis
γRV-ADA
2018 EMA*
LV-ABCD1
2018 EMA*
AAV8-MTM1
2018 EMA
Yescarta
γRV-CD19.CAR
2018 EMA
Kymriah
LV-CD19.CAR
2019 EMA
Zynteglo
LV-HBBT87Q
2019 EMA*
LV-FANCA
in vivo
2012 EMA
Glybera
AAV1-LPL
2017 EMA*
AAV5-FVIII
2017 EMA*
AAV5-FIX
AAV8-FIX
AAV100-FIX
Padua
2018 EMA
Luxturna
AAV2-RPE
2018 EMA*
AAV8-CNGB3
2019 EMA*
AAV9-SGSH
2019 EMA*
HSV-COL7A1
2020 EMA
Zolgensma
AAV9-SMN
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85 879


--- Page 3 ---

MEDICINE
(AA V) based vector (3). Subsequently the viral vectors 
and expression cassettes were improved, and several 
studies of AA V based gene therapy of hemophilia A and 
B were initiated (4). In an open label treatment study, 
15 adult patients with hemophilia A were treated in a 
single session with different dosages of AA V5 based 
gene therapy. Over the three year follow-up period it 
was observed that the 13 patients who had received a 
higher dose did not need any further factor substitutions 
and the bleeding rate was reduced by more than 90%. 
Almost all patients experienced temporarily higher 
transaminase levels after the treatment, which were re-
versed by giving temporary cortisone treatment and did 
not trigger clinical symptoms. One patient developed a 
fever, headache, and aching limbs after the infusion, 
which ceased after symptomatic therapy (5, 6). Further 
potentially limiting factors are pre-existing antibodies 
against the AA V capsid used or against the respective 
clotting factor.
Eye (retinopathies)
Ophthalmology is the specialty in which gene transfer 
has made the greatest progress, in the treatment of 
 retinopathies. In contrast to the often used systemic 
 application, the treatment is administered by means of 
direct subretinal injection of the vector after vitrec-
tomy. The effective substance V oretigene neparvovec is 
an AA V2 based gene addition for the treatment of 
Leber congenital amaurosis (type 2) and retinitis pig-
mentosa (type 20), which are both caused by mutations 
of the RPE65 gene. If the disorders remain untreated 
they will lead to complete blindness. An open label ran-
domized trial in a wait-list control group design, 21 of a 
total of 31 patients were randomized to direct treat-
ment. The primary endpoint, a standardized mobility 
test to measure functional vision in environments of 
different levels of brightness (multi-luminance mobility 
testing, MLMT) showed significant improvements in 
eyesight and orientation in poorly lit environments after 
the treatment compared with the control group. This 
positive effect was sustained in one study over a period 
of four years. Improvement of visual acuity in well lit 
environments did not reach significance  (7, 8). The 
therapy was approved by the EMA in 2018 for the treat-
ment of children and adults with a retinopathy owing to 
RPE65 mutations whose retinal tissues was still 
 functional. Both eyes were treated with a time interval. 
Currently, clinical trials are being conducted to evalu-
ate AA V based gene therapy in numerous additional 
gene related retinopathies.
Neuromuscular disorders
Potential gene therapeutic approaches for the treatment 
of different, mostly rapidly progressive neuromuscular 
disorders have been the subject of research for decades. 
A first breakthrough was achieved in the treatment of 
spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). This is an autosomal-
recessive disorder and is due to mutations of the SMN1 
gene. The resultant deficiency in SMN protein leads to 
the degeneration of the motor neurons in the spinal cord 
and associated progressive muscular weakness. Clini-
cally, a wide disease spectrum has been observed, with 
onset ranging from infancy to young adulthood. Most 
common is SMA onset within the first six months of 
life, which—if left untreated—will lead to death within 
the first two years of life because of the involvement of 
the respiratory muscles. 
Nusinersen is a causal treatment that has been 
available since 2017. It’s a splicing modifier, which 
after an initial saturation phase is administered intra-
thecally every four months via lumbar puncture (9, 10).
Gene therapy for SMA is done by using an AA V9 
vector, which transports the SMN1 gene into the 
motor neurons of the spinal cord after s single 
 intravenous application. Sufficient transduction after 
intravenous administration is successful especially in 
infancy. A study of the substance onasemnogene 
 abeparvovec showed in 12 infants, who received a 
higher dose of the gene therapy, motor progress that 
was not observed in the natural course. 24 months 
after the treatment, all treated children were 
 event-free—that is, they survived without long-term 
ventilation—compared with less than 8% over the 
natural course (11). The most common adverse effects 
were asymptomatic increase in transaminase levels, 
thrombocytopenia, and temporary fever and vomit-
ing. Recently, individual cases have been described of 
subacute liver failure after the therapy had been given 
(12). 
FIGURE 2
Principles of gene addition therapy
In ex vivo gene therapy, the target cells are isolated from the body first, in order to modify them 
genetically by applying a viral vector. When using a lentiviral vector, the therapeutic gene is in-
tegrated into the host genome in a stable way, which means it is passed to the daughter cells. 
Subsequently the cells are implanted back into the patient. The cases of leukemia triggered by 
retroviral insertional mutagenesis in early gene therapy studies have not occurred since sec-
ond generation retroviral and lentiviral vectors have been used. 
In in vivo gene therapy, viral vectors that code for the therapeutic gene are transferred directly 
into the body of the patient. The vectors used for these treatments are mostly derived from 
adeno-associated viruses (AAV) (39). In contrast to lentiviral vectors, AAV vectors do not inte-
grate their genome into the host genome. It remains in the cell nucleus as an episome but is 
not multiplied during cell division. AAV vectors are therefore particularly suitable for gene 
transfer in de facto post-mitotic tissue, such as retina, liver, or muscle. 
in vivo ex vivo
Injection
AAV vector
episomal
transplantation
Lentiviral
vector
Integration 
into genome
Cell removal 
880 Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85


--- Page 4 ---

MEDICINE
Onasemnogene abeparvovec was approved by the 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the 
treatment of children with SMA up to the age of 2 
years in 2019. The demand of affected families to be 
given a treatment, which incurs costs of up to 2 
 million Euro, before this has been approved for use in 
Europe led to great media interest and public 
 discussions in Germany, too (13, 14). 
The approval of onasemnogene abeparvovec is-
sued by the EMA in 2020 is notably wider than the 
populations investigated in clinical trials and has 
prompted debates about the safety and efficacy in this 
extended patient population (15, 16). Clinical studies 
that directly compare nNusinersen and onasemnogene 
abeparvovec regarding safety and efficacy do not 
exist.
For the most common hereditary muscle disorder 
in children—the X-linked inherited Duchenne muscu-
lar dystrophy—the size of the defective dystrophin 
gene is a problem as it exceeds the capacity of the 
viral vectors. For this reason, the so called microdys-
trophin genes have been developed, which contain the 
most important elements of the dystrophin gene but 
are notably smaller (17). The clinical efficacy of AA V 
based gene therapy using microdystrophins is cur-
rently being investigated in clinical trials.
Clear clinical improvements have recently been 
observed for X-linked inherited myotubular 
 myopathy, whose estimated incidence is about 
1 : 50 000 male newborns (18). It is mostly associated 
with severe congenital muscle weakness, which 
necessitates artificial respiration. An open label treat-
ment study in 12 patients described improvements in 
motor and respiratory function after AA V8 based 
gene therapy to the point where artificial respiration 
was no longer required (18).
However, in 2020, two children who had received a 
higher dose of this gene therapy died from sepsis, 
which was probably due to liver injury. The use of the 
therapy in further patients has therefore been stopped 
(20).
Immune system
For ADA-SCID, an extremely rare immune defect (se-
vere combined immunodeficiency [SCID]) with de-
pletion of the T, B, and NK lymphocytes and conse-
quently lacking adaptive humoral and cellular immune 
response, gene therapy was approved in Europe as 
early as 2016. Untreated, the affected infants will die 
within their first few years of life. Therapeutic ap-
proaches to date consist of bone marrow transplantation 
or enzyme substitution therapy. Gene therapy in 
 ADA-SCID is administered ex vivo. To this end, 
CD34+-cells are extracted from a bone marrow biopsy 
specimen or peripheral blood, corrected via a retroviral 
vector with an intact ADA gene, and then infused intra-
venously.
Gene therapy is approved for patients who do not 
have a suitable donor for bone marrow transplan-
tation. Because the disease is so rare and the therapy 
so complex, the procedure is currently provided in 
Europe in only one center in Milan (Italy). For the 12 
participants in the pivotal studies, follow-up data with 
a median observation period of 12 years are now 
available, which showed a survival rate of 100%, of 
which 92% were event-free (21). For other hereditary 
immune defects, gene therapies are already in 
 advanced clinical development (22,23).
Disorders of hematopoiesis
In 2019 the first gene therapy was approved for the 
treatment of hereditary hemoglobinopathy. The 
 preparation Betibeglogene autotemcel can be used 
in adolescent and adult patients with transfusion 
BOX 1
Important terms relating to gene therapy
● Antisense oligonucleotide 
Synthetically produced fragment of ribonucleic acid (RNA), which can affect 
splicing of pre-RNA. Nusinersen (Spinraza) is an antisense oligonucleotide 
that is approved for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy. The treatment 
does not change the genetic information directly, only the way in which it is 
read. 
● CAR T-cell therapy 
The so called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy is a novel thera-
peutic approach, which was developed primarily to treat cancer. Lymphocytes 
are taken from the patient and gene transfer is used to furnish these cells with 
specific CARs. Upon infusion, the CAR T-cells recognize tumor-associated 
antigens in a targeted manner and destroy the tumor cells by  activating the im-
mune system.
● CRISPR-Cas9 
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-Cas9 is an instru-
ment used in genome editing consisting of enzyme (Cas9) and a short guide 
RNA. The complex is referred to in vernacular language as “gene scissors.”
● Episome 
Circular extrachromosomal DNA molecule that is not integrated into the ge-
nome. 
● Expression cassette 
DNA segment that is responsible for the synthesis of RNA. In addition to the 
protein coding sequence, it contains regulatory sequences that control tran-
scription (for example, promotor) and translation.
● Insertional mutagenesis 
Genotoxic effects as a result of the insertion of genetic information into the 
 cellular genome, especially in the genetic modification of stem cells by using 
retroviral vectors.
● Transduction 
In genetics, this describes the delivery of genetic material into target cells by 
using viral vectors.
● Viral vectors 
Intentionally modified virus particles that are used in gene technology to de-
liver genetic material into target cells. They are in vernacular language referred 
to as gene ferries.
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85 881


--- Page 5 ---

MEDICINE
TABLE 
Gene therapies licensed for use in Europe
In contrast to the usual practice of the Deutsches Ärzteblatt we list the medications used for the therapy under their proprietary names in order to facilitate easier recognition, as even experts are 
often unfamiliar with the vector names. See Box 2 regarding the terminology of gene therapeutics. 
*1 Details on the precise area of use should be taken from the product leaflets/information. 
*2 The reported prevalence rates of patients suitable for the relevant therapy are often subject to great uncertainties. Unless reported otherwise the data are from the reports of the Institute for 
Quality and Efficiency in Healthcare  (IQWiG) in the context of benefit assessments by the Federal Joint Committee (www.g-ba.de). Some prevalence rates refer to patients in the statutory 
health insurance scheme (GKV), this proportion accounts for 90 % of the total population.
*3vgl. www.ema.europa.eu/en/medicines/human/orphan-designations/eu305313 
Product 
Year of approval
Alipogentiparvovec
(Glybera)
2012 (approval expired in 
2017)
Talimogen laherparepvec 
(Imlygic) 
2015
Strimvelis
2016Tisagenlecleucel 
 (Kymriah) 
2018
Axicabtagene ciloleucel 
(Yescarta)
2018
Voretigen neparvovec 
(Luxturna)
2018
Betibeglogene autotemcel 
(Zynteglo) 
2019
Onasemnogene 
 abeparvovec  (Zolgensma)
2020
Indication*1
Adults with familial  lipoprotein lipase deficiency (LPLD) 
with severe or multiple episodes of pancreatitis in spite 
of a low-fat diet
Adults with non-resectable, local or distant metastatic 
melanoma (stages IIIB, IIIC, and IVM1a)
Patients with severe combined immunodeficiency 
caused by adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA-
SCID), for which no suitable human  leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) compatible stem cell donor from the family is 
available
Patients aged up to 25 years with refractory or 
 recurrent B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); 
adults with diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) 
after a minimum of two systemic treatments
Adults with recurrent or refractory diffuse large B cell 
lymphoma (DLBCL) and primary mediastinal large B 
cell lymphoma (PMBCL) after a minimum of two sys-
temic treatments
Patients with vision loss owing to hereditary retinal 
dystrophy, as a result of confirmed  biallelic RPE65 
 mutations
Patients > 12 years with transfusion dependent 
 β-thalassemia (TDT), who do not have a β0/β0 geno-
type, and for whom no stem cell donor is available
Patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) owing to 
a biallelic mutation in the SMN1 gene and the clinical 
phenotype of SMA type 1 or up to 3 SMN2 copies 
Prevalence*2
Target popu-
lation in Ger-
many: 17–35
Target popu-
lation in Ger-
many: 75–225
Prevalence 
0.02 : 10 000*
3
 means a preva-
lence for all of 
Germany of 
about 160 
Target popu-
lation in 
 Germany: 
438–702
Target popu-
lation in 
 Germany: 
871–1 064
Target popu-
lation in Ger-
many: 189–290
Target popu-
lation in 
 Germany: 
49–53
Target popu-
lation in Ger-
many: 71–120 
patients with 
SMA type 1, 
770 bis 941 pa-
tients with later 
disease onset, 
SMA incidence 
at birth about 
100 per year
Viral vector or cell 
therapy
AAV1 vector coding 
for human LPL gene 
Vector coding for 
human  GM-CSF, 
which is based on 
 attenuated HSV-1
Ex vivo therapy of 
autologous 
CD34
+-cells trans-
duced by using 
retroviral vector carry-
ing the ADA coding 
sequence
Ex vivo therapy of len-
tivirally transduced 
autologous T-cells that 
express a chimeric 
antigen receptor (CAR) 
directed against CD19 
Ex vivo therapy of 
retrovirally transduced 
autologous T-cells, 
that express a chimeric 
antigen receptor (CAR) 
directed against CD19 
AAV2 vector coding 
for the human RPE65 
gene 
Ex vivo therapy of 
CD34
+-cells trans-
duced with a lentiviral 
vector coding for 
β-Globin (T87Q)
AAV9 vector coding 
for the human SMN1- 
gene 
Application
Several intramuscular injec-
tions of the vector in one 
session
Repeated injection of the 
 vector into cutaneous, subcu-
taneous, and/or nodal lesions 
Intravenous administration of 
the  genetically modified 
CD34
+ --cells
Intravenous administration of 
the  genetically modified  T-cells
Intravenous administration of 
the  genetically modified  T-cells
Subretinal injection of the 
 vector
Intravenous administration of 
the  genetically modified  
CD34
+ -cells
Intravenous  infusion of the 
vector
882 Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85


--- Page 6 ---

MEDICINE
 depen dent β-thalassemia (non-β0/β0 genotype) if no 
suitable donor for a stem cell transplant is available (24).
Gene therapy is done ex vivo, by adding to the 
autologous hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) func-
tional copies of the β-globin gene (βA-T87Q globin 
gene variant) by means of a lentivirus vector. The 
 primary outcome measure of the studies that was rel-
evant for approval was a minimum period of 1 year 
without transplantation in the follow-up period of 24 
months. This was achieved in 11 of the 14 patients 
with a non-β
0/β0 genotype. The only serious adverse 
effect associated with  to Betibeglogene autotemcel 
was thrombocytopenia in one of 45 patients (25).
In this context it is worth mentioning that phase 1/2 
trials of CRISPR edited HSC in β-thalassemia and 
sickle cell disease seem to have been successful in 
their first patients. For instance,a 20 year old trans-
f u s i o n  d e p e n d e n t  t h a l a s s e m i a  p a t i e n t  h a d  p r e s e n t e d  
with “normal” blood counts for 18 months and had 
not required any more transfusions (26).
Mucoviscidosis
Mucoviscidosis, also known as cystic fibrosis, is an 
autosomal recessive metabolic disorder with an 
 incidence of about 1:4 000 neonates. Mutations in the 
CFTR gene disrupt the function of the chloride chan-
nel, which affects in particular the respiratory tract, the 
pancreas, the small bowel, and the male sexual organs 
(27). Especially the pulmonary manifestation is the 
 target of gene therapeutic interventions.
In 2015 the results of a double blind placebo 
 controlled phase 2b trial were published, which inves-
tigated the monthly inhalation of a CFTR gene/lipo-
some complex. Altogether after 12 months a small, 
statistically significant therapeutic success was seen 
with regard to the primary outcome measure (forces 
expiratory volume at 1 second [FEV1]), of 3.7% 
(95% confidence interval [0.1; 7.3] compared with 
placebo. The individual response was, however, so 
heterogeneous that the clinical efficacy overall was 
rated as non-satisfactory (28). Since then research has 
focused on the development of new vectors that en-
able better transduction of the target cells, especially 
in the respiratory tract (29).
Particularities and challenges of gene therapies
In contrast to conventional drug treatments, gene thera-
peutics ( Box 2 ) are mostly administered in a single 
session. Using these innovative therapies requires rel-
evant expertise, both regarding the application (for 
example, ex vivo preparation, subretinal injection) as 
well as regarding monitoring and treatment of potential 
adverse effects (immune reaction, off-target effects).
Since the context so far has mostly been one of rare 
diseases, approval of gene transfer therapies is mostly 
based on studies with small patient numbers and 
 follow-up periods of very few years. This seems sen-
sible in order not to withhold effective treatments 
from affected patients, but it is also associated with a 
risk of as yet unknown adverse effects (Box 3). 
Often the effect size of a gene therapeutic depends 
on the stage of the disease at the time of the treatment. 
In spinal muscular atrophy, initial studies showed that 
a presymptomatic start of treatment is particularly 
promising and often enables age-appropriate learning/
development of the ability to walk independently (3). 
In an open label study of presymptomatic gene ther-
apy for SMA, seven of 29 patients gained the ability 
to walk independently. All others had not reached the 
age threshold at the time of interim analysis (31). Cur-
rently, efforts are under way to include genetic testing 
for spinal muscular atrophy in the general newborn 
screening (32).
BOX 2
Terminology for gene therapeutics
The World Health Organization published requirements for the proprietary 
names of gene therapeutics (40). The names as a rule consist of two words, 
with the first word relating to the gene product used and the second word to 
the vector used.
Example: Onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma) for the treatment of 
spinal muscular atrophy. In this preparation, the word component “semnogene” 
refers to the included SMN gene, whereas “parvo” refers to the vector, an 
adeno-associated virus (Parvoviridae). The final syllable “vec” refers to the fact 
that this is a non-replicating vector.
BOX 3
Ethical, regulatory, and economic characteristics/ 
particularities of somatic gene therapies
To date, somatic gene therapies have been used mainly in monogenic, mostly 
rare disorders, which have a severe and progressive course and for which 
hardly any therapeutic alternatives exist. As in- vivo gene therapies can be 
used only once because of immunization, the difficult question in clinical re-
search already is that of adequate dosage. On the one hand, the dose should 
lead to a sufficient cell transduction and, on the other hand, toxic effects owing 
to an excessively high viral load should be avoided.
For methodological and ethical reasons, the case numbers and observa-
tion/follow-up periods are often limited in clinical studies, and randomized 
placebo controlled trials are more likely to be the exception. The available 
 evidence is therefore limited. The regulatory authorities are then faced with the 
difficult task of balancing the remaining uncertainties and risks with the poten-
tially sustained benefit of the therapy for the affected patients. 
Finally, it needs to be discussed how the financial value of these innovative 
therapies can be determined while considering the development costs, but 
also the capacity of the solidarity community. A “learning system” would make 
sense in this context. It would enable even after “early” approval, a continuous 
and timely new evaluation of efficacy and safety, and therefore the validity/
value of gene therapies. A comprehensive follow-up and documentation of all 
treated patients will be the main crucial element in this. The indication and the 
reimbursement could then be adjusted dynamically to the growing evidence.
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85 883


--- Page 7 ---

MEDICINE
On the other hand, the therapeutic benefit of gene 
therapy in advanced disease stages can be very 
 limited. Which patients benefit to which degree from 
gene therapy can be determined conclusively only in 
the context of long term studies. Depending on the 
question, product or disease specific registries are 
suitable, with the latter also enabling comparative 
analysis of different products (24, 33).
Registries have to meet certain quality criteria re-
garding data collection and analysis (34, 35). Ideally, 
long term, if possible industry independent, follow-up 
should be ensured for all treated patients. This 
requires relevant regulatory specifications (36) and is 
a laborious and complex undertaking for treatment 
centers. In view of the, in some cases, extremely high 
medication costs, relevant resources will have to be 
made available for documenting efficacy and safety. 
This may be the only way to allow the appropriate and 
economical use of these therapies in the mid term.
From a health economic perspective too, the intro-
duction of gene therapies entails certain challenges. In 
some cases, costs of up to 2 million Euro for a single-
dose treatment contrasts with the long term costs of 
conventional therapy. For this reason, new reimburse-
ment methods are under discussion that are guided by 
the therapeutic success. For CAR T-cell therapy (Box 
1) using Tisagenlecleucel, for example, a partial 
 reimbursement of the price by the pharmaceutical 
manufacturer was agreed if a patient were to die from 
cancer within a defined time period. Other models 
prefer price adjustments that are guided by the total 
evidence for a product and not the individual case 
(37).
Outlook—the importance of gene therapy
The first gene therapies for monogenic disorders are al-
ready in use in clinical practice, and it is to be expected 
that the number of approved gene therapies will in-
crease further over the coming years. In addition to the 
classic virus vector based gene transfer, targeted ge-
nome editing is increasingly drawing attention. The po-
tential of somatic gene therapy has become vastly more 
than just replacing defective or lacking genes and can 
also be used to insert particular enzymes or other effec-
tor proteins, such as CRISPR-Cas genetic scissors. This 
means that disorders with a dominant inheritance, non-
monogenic entities, such as cardiovascular disorders, 
inflammatory disorders, and Parkinson’s disease, could 
also be treated with gene therapy in the future.
Key messages
● Gene therapies replace or repair “malfunctioning” genes and open up new thera-
peutic options.
● Owing to genetic, tissue specific, and immunological particularities, not all hered-
itary disorders are equally suitable for a gene therapeutic approach.
● A single treatment session often leads to long-term therapeutic effects, in particular 
for certain cases of monogenic disorders.
●  For methodological and ethical reasons, approval is often not based on double 
blinded randomized trials but on open label studies with limited case numbers. The 
systematic collection of data on clinical effects and adverse effects therefore should 
be continued after a drug has been approved.
● The high costs of therapy and the effort involved in applying and monitoring these 
novel therapies present new challenges for the healthcare system (among others, 
ensuring access, quality assurance, and economic viability).
Conflict of interest statement 
Prof. Kirschner received consultancy fees and travel expenses from 
 Avexis, Biogen, Pfizer, Roche, Sarepta, and Scholar Rock. He received 
lecture honoraria from Avexis, Biogen, and Roche. Study support (third 
party funding) was made available to him by Biogen and Roche. He is the 
director of the SMArtCARE registry for the long term follow up of SMA and 
a member of the board of the European Reference Network for rare 
 neuromuscular diseases (EURO-NMD). 
Prof. Cathomen holds shares in CRISPR Therapeutics and patents with 
relation to the subject from Freiburg University Medical Center. He 
 received lecture honoraria from the Initiative Gesundheitsindustrie Hessen 
[IGH, an alliance formed of four partnering groups: Hesse’s state govern-
ment, companies active in Hesse’s healthcare industries, the Hesse-
 Thuringia area of the IG BCE [the trade union for mining, chemicals, and 
energy], and Hesse’s institutions of higher education], and Medscape 
 Oncology. Study support (third party funding) was made available to him 
by Cellectis SA and Miltenyi Biotec.
Manuscript received on 28 February 2020, revised version accepted on 
 19 August 2020.
Translated from the original German by Birte Twisselmann, PhD.
References
1. Paul Ehrlich Institut: Gent herapeutika. www.pei.de/DE/ 
arzneimittel/atmp/gentherapeutika/gentherapeutika-node.html 
(last accessed on 26 February 2020).
2. Cornu TI, Mussolino C, Cathomen T: Refining strategies to trans-
late genome editing to the clinic. Nat Med 2017; 23: 415–23.
3. Mingozzi F, High KA: Immune responses  to AAV in clinical trials. 
Curr Gene Ther 2007; 7: 316–24.
4. Miesbach W, Schwäble J, Müller MM, Seifried E: Treatment op-
tions in  hemophilia. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2019; 116: 791–8.
5. Pasi KJ, Rangarajan S, Mitchell N, et al.: Multiyear follow-up of 
AAV5-hFVIII-SQ  gene therapy for hemophilia A. N Engl J Med 
2020; 382: 29–40.
6. Perrin GQ, Herzog RW, Markusic DM: Update on clinical gene 
therapy for  hemophilia. Blood 2019; 133: 407–14.
7. Maguire AM, Russell S, Wellman JA, et al.: Efficacy, safety, and 
durability of voretigene neparvovec -rzyl in RPE65 mutation-as-
sociated inherited retinal dystrophy: results of phase 1 and 3 
trials. Ophthalmology 2019; 126: 1273–85.
8. Russell S, Bennett J, Wellman JA, et al.: Efficacy and safety of 
voretigene  
neparvovec (AAV2-hRPE65 v2) in patients with 
RPE65-mediated inherited retinal dystrophy: a randomised, con-
trolled, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2017; 390: 849–60.
9. Finkel RS, Mercuri E, Darras BT, et al.: Nusinersen versus sham 
control in  infantile-onset spi nal muscular atrophy. N Engl J Med 
2017; 377: 1723–32.
10. Mercuri E, Darras BT, Chiriboga CA, et al.: Nusinersen versus 
sham control in later-onset spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl J 
Med 2018; 378: 625–35.
11. Mendell JR, Al-Zaidy S, Shell R, et al.: Single-dose gene-replace-
ment therapy for spinal muscular  atrophy. N Engl J Med 2017; 
377: 1713–22.
12. Feldman AG, Parsons JA, Dutmer CM, et al.: Subacute liver fail-
ure following gene replacement therapy for spinal muscular 
atrophy Type I. J Pediatr 2020; S0022–3476(20)30682-X. Epub 
ahead of print.
13. Servais L, Kirschner J, Muntoni F:  Randomisation versus prioriti-
sation in a managed access programme: lessons from spinal 
muscular atrophy. Neuromuscu l Disord 2020; 30: 267–9.
14. Ziegler A, Müller-Felber W, Hahn A, von Moers A, Schara U, 
Kirschner J:  Spinale Muskelatrophie: Gentherapie ohne Zulas-
sung. Dtsch Arztebl 2019; 116: A-2232.
884 Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85


--- Page 8 ---

MEDICINE
15. Kirschner J, Bernert G, v. der Hagen M,  et al.: Zur Gentherapie der Spinalen 
Muskelatrophie mit Onasemnogene Abepar vovec. Stellungnahme der Ge-
sellschaft für Neuropädiatrie. Monat sschr Kinderheilkd 2020; 168: 938–41.
16. Kirschner J, Butoianu N, Goemans N,  et al.: European ad-hoc consensus 
statement on gene replacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. Eur J 
Paediatr Neurol 2020; S1090–3798(20)30142–2. 
17. Duan D: Systemic AAV micro-dystrophin gene therapy for duchenne muscular 
dystrophy. Mol Ther 2018; 26: 2337–56.
18. Vandersmissen I, Biancalana V, Servais L, et al.: An integrated model ling 
 methodology for estimating the prevalence of centronuclear myopathy. 
 Neuromuscul Disord 2018; 28: 766–77.
19. Audentes: Audentes therapeutics tresent s new positive data from ASPIRO, the 
 clinical trial evaluating AT132 in patients with X-linked myotubular myopathy 
(XLMTM), at the 24th International Annual Congress of the World Muscle Society. 
www.audentestx.com/press_release/audentes -therapeutics-presents-new-positive-
data-aspiro-clinical/ (las t accessed on 26 February 2020).
20. Paulk N: Gene therapy: it’s time to  talk about high-dose AAV. www.geneng
news.com/topics/genome-editing/gene-ther apy-its-time-to-talk-about-high-dose-
aav/ (last accessed on 20 July 2020).
21. European Medicine Agency: Zusammenfass ung der Merkmale des Arzneimit-
tels Strimvelis www.ema.europa.eu/ en/documents/product-information/strim
velis-epar-product-information_de.pdf (last accessed on 20 July 2020).
22. Cavazzana M, Bushman FD, Miccio A, Andre-Schmutz I, Six E: Gene 
 therapy targeting haematopoietic stem cells for inherited diseases: progress 
and challenges. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2019; 18: 447–62.
23. Booth C, Romano R, Roncarolo MG, Thra sher AJ: Gene therapy for primary 
immunodeficiency. Hum Mol Genet 2019; 28: R15–R23.
24. Schuessler-Lenz M, Enzmann H, Vamvak as S: Regulators‘ advice can 
 make a difference: European Medicines Agency approval of zynteglo for beta 
thalassemia. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2020; 107: 492–4.
25. European Medicine Agency: Zusammenfass ung der Merkmale des Arzneimit-
tels Zynteglo. www.ema.europa.eu/en/d ocuments/product-information/zynteglo-
epar-product-information_de.pdf (last accessed on 20 July 2020).
26. Frangoul H, Altshuler D, Cappellini MD et al.: CRISPR-Cas9 Gene Editing for Sickle 
Cell Disease and beta-Thalassemia. N Engl J Med 2021; 384: 252–60.
27. Naehrig S, Chao CM, Naehrlich L: Cy stic fibrosis—diagnosis and treatment. 
Dtsch Arztebl Int 2017; 114: 564–74.
28. Alton E, Armstrong DK, Ashby D, et al.: Repeated nebulisation of 
 non-viral CFTR gene therapy in patients with cystic fibrosis: a randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, phas e 2b trial. Lancet Respir Med 2015; 
3: 684–91.
29. Yan Z, McCray PB, Jr., Engelhardt JF: Advances in gene therapy for cystic 
 fibrosis lung disease. Hum Mol Genet 2019; 28: R88–R94.
30. Schorling DC, Pechmann A, Kirschner J: Advances in treatment of spinal 
muscular atrophy—new phenotypes, new challenges, new implications for 
 care. J Neuromuscul Dis 2020; 7: 1–13.
31. Novartis: Zolgensma® data shows rapid,  significant, clinically meaningful 
 benefit in SMA including prolonged ev ent- free survival, motor milestone 
achievement and durability now up to 5 years post-dosing www.avexis.com/
Content/pdf/newsarticle-IVasset- 20200323.pdf (last accessed on 8 August 
2020).
32. Vill K, Kolbel H, Schwartz O, et  al.: One year of newborn screening for 
SMA—results of a german pilot proj ect. J Neuromuscul Dis 2019; 6: 503–15.
33. Pechmann A, Konig K, Bernert G, et al.: SMArtCARE—a platform to collect 
real-life outcome data of patients with spinal muscular atrophy. Orphanet J 
Rare Dis 2019; 14: 18.
34. McGettigan P, Alonso Olmo C, Plueschke K, et al.: Patient registries: 
an  underused resource for medicines  evaluation: operational proposals for 
 increasing the use of patient registri es in regulatory assessments. Drug Saf 
2019; 42: 1343–51.
35. Stausberg J, Maier B, Bestehorn K,  et al.: Memorandum Register für die 
 Versorgungsforschung: Update 2019. Gesundheitswesen 2020; 82: e39-e66.
36. Gemeinsamer Bundesausschuss: G-BA  konkretisiert Verfahren zu anwen-
dungsbegleitender Datenerhebung – Genther apie Zolgensma erster Fall. 
www.g-ba.de/presse/pressemitteilungen/8 74/ (last access ed on 20 July 
2020).
37. Korzilius H: Arzneimittel: Modelle für gerechtere Preise. Dtsch Arztebl 2019; 
116: A-503.
38. European Medicine Agency: PRIME: priority medicines. www.ema.europa.eu/
en/human-regulatory/research-development/prime-priority-medicines (last 
 accessed on 26 February 2020).
39. Buning H, Srivastava A: Capsid modifi cations for targeting and improv ing 
the efficacy of AAV vectors. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev 2019; 12: 248–65.
40. World Health Organization: Nomenclature schemes for advanced 
 therapies. www.who.int/medicines/services/inn/Nomenclature_schemes_ 
advanced_therapies_201707.pdf (last accessed on 20 July 2020).
Corresponding author  
Prof. Dr. med. Janbernd Kirschner 
Klinik für Neuropädiatrie und Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum 
Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde 
Universitätsklinikum Bonn 
Venusberg-Campus 1, 53127 Bonn, Germany 
janbernd.kirschner@ukbonn.de 
Cite this as  
Kirschner J, Cathomen T:  
Gene therapy for monogenic inherited disorders—   
opportunities and challenges. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85. 
DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2020.0878
Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85 885


--- Page 9 ---

MEDICINE
A Deutsches Ärzteblatt International | Dtsch Arztebl Int 2020; 117: 878–85 | Supplementary material
Questions for the articl e in issue 51–52/2020:
Gene Therapy for Monogenic Inherited Disorders—Opportunities and Challenges
CME credits for this unit can be obtained via cme.aerzteblatt.de un til 20 December 2021
Only one answer is possible per question. Please  select the answer that is most appropriate.
Question 1
Which disorder is treated with the effective substance 
 onasemnogene abeparvovec, approved by the European 
Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2020?
a) Glycogen storage disease type 2 (Pompe disease)
b) Myasthenia gravis
c) Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD)
d) Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
e) Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Question 2
Which term describes the addition of genetic information 
into a target cell by using a viral vector?
a) Induction
d) Transduction
c) Imputation
d) Transcription
e) Translation
Question 3
Which of the following disorders is treated by using ex vivo 
gene therapy?
a) Hereditary retinal dystrophy owing to RPE65 mutations
b) Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
c) Familiar lipoprotein lipase deficiency
d) Non-resectable metastatic melanoma
e) Severe combined immune deficiency (ADA-SCID)
Question 4
Which restrictions exist for the selection of a beta-
 thalassemia patient regarding therapy using Betibeglogene 
autotemcel?
a) Patients have to be of age
b) A suitable stem cell donor has to be available
c) Patients must be transfusion-dependent
d) Patients must have a β0/β0 genotype
e) Patients should be younger than 12 years
Question 5
Voretigen neparvovec is used to treat retinal dystrophy. 
Which genotype is required for the treatment to be 
 successful?
a) A biallelic RPE65 mutation
b) A biallelic mutation in the SMN1 gene
c) A monoallelic RPE65 mutation
d) A monoallelic mutation in the SMN1 gene
e) A biallelic mutation in the RPE65 gene and in the SMN1 gene
Question 6
What are the general advantages of somatic gene therapy?
a) The genetic information is passed down to offspring
b) The treatment can usually be given in a single session
c) No viral vectors are used
d) To date no known adverse effects have been observed
e) The more advances the disorder the more effective the therapy
Question 7
 For which disorders is the so called CAR T-cell therapy (chimeric 
antigen receptor) approved to date?
a) Retinal disorders
b) Hemophilia a
c) Autoimmune diseases
d) B-cell lymphoma/leukemia
e) Type 1 diabetes
Question 8
 Gene addition treatment comprises two different principles—in vivo 
therapy and ex vivo therapy. What are the advantages of ex vivo 
 therapy?
a) The production of the modified cells is not subject to any legislation
b) The product can be characterized before transplantation
c) No vector is needed to insert the genetic information
d) The added genetic information is not integrated into the cell genome
e) No cells/tissues have to be removed from the patient
Question 9
 The license of the first gene therapy originally approved by the EMA 
 expired in 2017. The therapy is used for which disorder?
a) Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (LPLD)
b) Retinopathy
c) Duchenne muscular dyustrophy
d) B cell lymphoma
e) Severe combined immunodeficiency (ADA-SCID)
Question 10
 Which pathophysiological mechanism is underlying muscle weakness 
in spinal muscular atrophy with SMN protein deficiency?
a) Degenerative processes in the motor cortex
b) Pyramidal tract lesions
c) Malformation of muscle fibers
d) Degeneration of motor neurons in the spinal cord
e) Malformation of the neuromuscular junction
cme plus  