# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/68/Lomash et al. - 2023 - Successfully Navigating Food and Drug Administration Orphan Drug and Rare Pediatric Disease Designat.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

CLINICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.
Successfully Navigating Food and Drug Administration Orphan
Drug and Rare Pediatric Disease Designations for AAV9-hPCCA
Gene Therapy: The National Institutes of Health Platform
Vector Gene Therapy Experience
Richa Madan Lomash,1 Oleg Shchelochkov,2 Randy J. Chandler, 2 NIH PaVe-GT Team, { Charles P. Venditti, 2
Anne R. Pariser, 3,* and Elizabeth A. Ottinger 1,*
1Therapeutic Development Branch, Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), NIH, Rockvil le, Maryland, USA;
2Organic Acid Research Section, Molecular Medicine Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; 3Division of Rare
Diseases Research Innovation, NCATS, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
{See Acknowledgments section.
Orphan drug designation (ODD) is an important program intended to facilitate the development of orphan drugs in the
United States. An orphan drug beneﬁting pediatric patients can qualify as a drug for a Rare Pediatric Disease Designation
(RPDD) as well. The ODD and RPDD programs provide ﬁnancial incentives for development of diagnostic drugs, pre-
ventive measures, and treatment of diseases affecting small patient populations (adult and pediatric) for which com-
mercial development would otherwise be very challenging. In 2019, a multidisciplinary group of collaborators at
National Institutes of Health (NIH) embarked upon a gene therapy platform program called Platform Vector Gene
Therapy (PaVe-GT) intended to develop gene therapies for four such rare disorders. An important part of PaVe-GT is to
publicly share scientiﬁc and regulatory experience gained at different stages during the implementation of the PaVe-GT
platform utilizing illustrative examples. The PaVe-GT team recently obtained ODD and RPDD for an adeno-associated
virus gene therapy to treat propionic acidemia. Given an increasing interest in obtaining ODD for gene therapy, espe-
cially by small companies, research investigators, and patient groups, we overview the submission process and subse-
quently provide examples of our ODD and RPDD applications. Our ODD and RPDD applications and templates can also
be found on the PaVe-GT website. Shared reference documents will have great utility to assist parties who may have
limited experience with the preparation of similar applications for their orphan product.
Keywords: rare diseases, orphan drug, orphan drug designation, Rare Pediatric Disease Designation, ﬁnancial incentives,
gene therapy
INTRODUCTION: THE PLATFORM VECTOR
GENE THERAPY PROGRAM
IN 2019, the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences (NCATS) at the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) embarked on a multiplexed approach to facilitate
the standardization of gene therapy development of rare
genetic diseases called the Platform Vector Gene Therapy
(PaVe-GT) program. The main goal of PaVe-GT is to test
whether the efﬁciency of gene therapy development and
clinical implementation can be increased using shared
approaches to streamline manufacturing, preclinical stud-
ies, and clinical protocols to treat rare monogenic diseases.
*Correspondence: Dr. Elizabeth A. Ottinger, Therapeutic Development Branch, Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing T ranslational Sciences
(NCATS), NIH, 9800 Medical Center Drive Bldg B, Rm 326, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. E-mail: elizabeth.ottinger@nih.gov; Dr. Anne R. Pariser, Division of Rare Diseases
Research Innovation, NCATS, NIH, Rockville, MD, USA. E-mail: anne.pariser@gmail.com
ª Richa Madan Lomash et al. 2023; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC-BY]
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the ori ginal work is properly cited.
HUMAN GENE THERAPY, VOLUME 34, NUMBERS 5 and 6 DOI: 10.1089/hum.2022.232 j 217
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.


--- Page 2 ---

PaVe-GT has been described in more detail elsewhere, 1
but brieﬂy, this program uses an adeno-associated virus
(AAV) as a ‘‘platform’’ vector to develop gene therapies
for four very low prevalence genetic diseases for which
there would otherwise be no or little commercial interest.
The diseases selected in PaVe-GT include two organic
acidemias, propionyl-CoA carboxylase alpha subunit pro-
pionic acidemia ( PCCA-related PA) and isolated meth-
ylmalonic acidemia cobalamin type B ( MMAB-related
MMA), and two congenital myasthenic syndromes caused
by deﬁciency of DOK7 (downstream of tyrosine kinase 7)
or Collagen Q (ColQ), a form of nonﬁbrillar collagen.
PaVe-GT also intends to help the rare disease community
better understand the regulatory requirements and oppor-
tunities related to late-stage preclinical through early
clinical development for investigational gene therapy drug
products and ways to navigate the regulatory process.
Our aim is to leverage the learnings and experience of
PaVe-GT to other AAV gene therapy development pro-
grams, irrespective of the capsid or disease type. As part
of this effort, the program plans to release a series of reg-
ulatory documentation and communications throughout
our drug development program. Additional program infor-
mation and project updates can be found on the PaVe-GT
website (https://pave-gt.ncats.nih.gov/).
The ﬁrst gene therapy product, adeno-associated virus
serotype 9 human propionyl-CoA carboxylase, alpha sub-
unit (AAV9-hPCCA, NCATS-BL0746) for the treatment
of PCCA-related PA, was granted an Orphan Drug Des-
ignation (ODD) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) in 2021
2 and subsequently a Rare Pediatric
Disease Designation (RPDD) as a drug for the treatment
of a rare pediatric disease, PCCA-related PA in 2022. The
focus of this communication is to help readers understand
the signiﬁcance of these incentive programs in stimulating
drug development and illustrate how sponsors can utilize
FDA guidance to prepare ODD or RPDD applications.
A sponsor, as per FDA regulations (21CFR 312.3), is
deﬁned as a person who takes responsibility for and
initiates a clinical investigation. The sponsor may be a
government agency, academic institution, pharmaceutical
company, private organization, or an individual.
3
BACKGROUND: THE ORPHAN DRUG ACT,
ODD, AND RPDD
It is estimated that there are more than 7,000 rare dis-
eases,4,5 the majority of which are single gene disorders.5,6
While the number of people with an individual rare dis-
ease is small, the total number of individuals living with
a rare disease in the United States is estimated at 25–
30 million.
7 Most rare diseases ( *95%) do not have an
FDA-approved therapy, 8 highlighting the considerable
need for new treatments for this relatively large cohort
of patients. Since an individual rare disease patient pop-
ulation is small, drug proﬁtability is likely to be low in
comparison to the cost of drug development, leading to a
low return on investment for a company that develops
‘‘orphan drugs.’’ The Orphan Drug Act (ODA), enacted
in the United States in 1983, supports the development
of orphan drugs (including biologics) for rare diseases or
conditions by providing ﬁnancial incentives, thus reduc-
ing the overall development costs.
9 The ODA is admin-
istered by FDA’s Ofﬁce of Orphan Product Development
(OOPD),10 and they have issued regulations detailing
requirements for granting an orphan designation. 11
For a drug to qualify as an orphan drug, 9,11 it must:
(a) Be intended for the treatment of a disease or con-
dition affecting fewer than a total of 200,000
people in the United States, or
(b) If the drug is a vaccine, diagnostic drug, or pre-
ventive drug, the persons to whom the drug will be
administered in the United States must be fewer
than 200,000 per year, or
(c) For drugs intended for a disease or condition
affecting 200,000 or more people, or for a vaccine,
diagnostic drug, or preventive drug to be admin-
istered to 200,000 or more persons per year in the
United States, the drug may qualify as an orphan
drug when there is no reasonable expectation the
cost of developing such a drug would be proﬁt-
able by sales in the United States.
There are substantial ﬁnancial beneﬁts to obtaining an
ODD
12 that include:
(a) Tax credits for qualiﬁed clinical testing upon
approval,
(b) Waiver of New Drug Application (NDA) or Bio-
logics Licensing Application (BLA) Prescription
Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) fees ( *$3.1 M in
2022)
10 upon submission of the application,
(c) Eligibility for 7-year marketing exclusivity,
termed ‘‘orphan exclusivity,’’ postmarketing
approval.9,13,14
Another program to incentivize therapeutic invention,
the Priority Review Vouchers (PRVs) program, originally
established for neglected tropical diseases, was subsequ-
ently expanded to include rare pediatric diseases.
15 The
RPDD program was started in 2012 and extended by
the Congress in 2020
16 with the intention of encourag-
ing the development of drugs for rare pediatric disorders.
RPDD can be used alone or in combination with other
incentive programs, like ODD. A RPDD is for a serious
or life-threatening rare disease or condition primarily
affecting individuals from birth to 18 years. If a drug
qualiﬁes under a RPDD, and receives marketing approval,
a sponsor is eligible to receive a PRV that may be used
for an expedited review of a subsequent marketing appli-
218 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 3 ---

cation for a different product or sold to another sponsor. 17
According to Government Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO)
report, 31 PRVs (19 for rare pediatric diseases) were
awarded until 2019; of these, 16 vouchers have been
redeemed thus far by sponsors for several indications.
18
ODD REQUEST OVERVIEW
In this article, we share our experience for successfully
navigating the process of obtaining an ODD and a RPDD
for an AAV9 gene therapy to treat PCCA-related PA. We
submitted our applications separately, but the ODD and
RPDD applications may be submitted simultaneously.
Both applications typically rely upon similar information,
so submitting together can streamline the process and
timeline. Since we submitted the ODD ﬁrst, we will pri-
marily outline the process using our ODD example.
An ODD can be requested for a new drug, without
any prior regulatory approval for treatment, prevention, or
diagnosis of a rare disease or condition or for a previ-
ously approved drug if it is intended to treat, prevent, or
diagnose a rare disease or condition that is different from
the prior marketing approval. In addition, before drug ap-
proval, more than one sponsor may receive ODD for
the same drug and the same rare disease or condition, but
each sponsor seeking ODD must ﬁle a complete request for
ODD, and the ﬁrst sponsor to receive FDA drug approval
receives the ﬁnancial development beneﬁts and conditional
marketing exclusivity.
11,19 Similarly, a marketing applica-
tion is conditionally designated as a RPDD with the ﬁnal
determination made at the time of drug approval.17
According to the recent FDA guidance, ‘‘Interpreting
Sameness of Gene Therapy Products Under the Orphan
Drug Regulations,’’20 FDA generally intends to determine
whether two gene therapy products are different drugs on
a case-by-case basis based on the principal molecular
structural features, such as transgenes and vectors (cap-
sids), for purposes of 21 CFR 316.3(b)(14)(ii). Usually,
two AAV gene therapy products are considered differ-
ent if they express a different transgene or have different
vectors which could impact the tropism, immune response
avoidance, or potential insertional mutagenesis. However,
two gene therapy products are not considered to be dif-
ferent drugs based solely on minor differences between
their transgenes and/or vectors. If two gene therapy prod-
ucts express the same transgene and have the same vector,
determination of their sameness may also depend on
additional features of the ﬁnal product that can contribute
to the therapeutic effect such as regulatory elements ( e.g.,
promoters, enhancers, and so on).
A sponsor may request ODD at any time in its drug
development process (preclinical through clinical phases)
before submission of a marketing application.
21 It is, how-
ever, necessary to identify the lead investigational drug
product for treating the orphan disease/condition before
preparing the request since ODDs are speciﬁc to drug
products. The information available can vary per pro-
gram and any evidence that helps better describe the
context of use of the proposed drug and its beneﬁt in the
disease indication can support an ODD application. This
evidence can be in the form of literature, expert opinion,
disease models, basic and translational studies, or reports.
Among the barriers that families and small patient
advocacy groups face, the establishment of direct con-
nections with researchers, clinicians, and disease experts
for navigating disease information and estimating the
patient population size are challenging. NCATS Division
of Rare Diseases Research Innovation has resources such
as the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
(GARD), Patient-toolkit, and Rare Diseases Clinical
Research Network (RDCRN) to help groups further
their understanding of the disease and make connections
with appropriate experts. Scientiﬁc meetings organized
by patient groups and patient focused conferences are also
effective means to directly interact with researchers and
clinicians. Once the right connections are made, sponsors
may work with disease experts and drug developers to
draft their own ODD application or outsource drafting
of their application to commercial vendors providing such
services.
An overview of the ODD process is outlined in Fig. 1
with the main considerations being:
/C15 Proof of direct beneﬁt: Establishing a medically
plausible basis for the drug’s effectiveness in the
rare disease supported by efﬁcacy data from either
clinical or nonclinical studies in a relevant model
of the human disease.
/C15 Patient population size in the United States: Estab-
lishing the orphan status of the disease or condi-
tion by determining population size from relevant
literature and/or appropriate sources.
As required by the OOPD, we drafted a comprehensive
ODD request application and submitted it to FDA OOPD,
with all the information outlined under 21 CFR 316.20
‘‘Content, and format of a request for ODD.’’
22 As a
tool intended to assist sponsors in providing the ODD
request information completely and succinctly, FDA
OOPD provides the optional Form FDA 4035 ‘‘FDA
Orphan Drug Designation Request Form,’’ where the
requirements for an ODD request have been included.
23
Alternatively, sponsors may compile their own applica-
tion based on FDA regulatory requirements. We com-
piled our own application and, during the process, created
a checklist to serve as a guide (Table 1) and prepared
a template (available on PaVe-GT website). The lightly
redacted ODD and RPDD applications that were submit-
ted to the FDA are also provided (Supplementary Files S1
and S2).
ORPHAN DRUG AND RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE DESIGNATION 219


--- Page 4 ---

APPROACH: CONTENT OF AN ODD
APPLICATION
ODD request statement
The application request starts with a statement from the
sponsor and the following is what we used for our appli-
cation. ‘‘Pursuant to 21 CFR 316.20, National Institutes
of Health (NIH), National Center for Advancing Trans-
lational Sciences (NCATS) requests designation of adeno-
associated virus serotype 9 human propionyl-CoA
carboxylase, alpha subunit (AAV9-hPCCA) as an orphan
drug product for treatment of patients with propionic
acidemia (PA) resulting from a deﬁciency of propionyl-
CoA carboxylase, alpha subunit (PCCA).’’ See Section 1
in Supplementary File S1 for the complete statement.
Figure 1. The ODD application compilation process. The application can be compiled as per the FDA requirements at different program stages once the lead
investigational drug product has been identiﬁed. The application must include proof of direct beneﬁt, documentation of population size, and orphan drug
regulatory history. Direct beneﬁt information and population size are critical, and substantial details in these sections make a strong applicatio n. FDA, Food and
Drug Administration; ODD, orphan drug designation.
Table 1. Orphan drug designation request checklist as per Food and Drug Administration regulations
Required Section of the ODD Request Description of the Requirements
, ODD request statement A statement from the sponsor requesting an ODD for an investigational drug product for a rare disease or
condition. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(1)
, Administrative information Name and address of the sponsor, sponsor’s primary and any alternate contact(s), and regulatory agent(s) (where
applicable). 21 CFR 316.20(b)(2)
, Description of the rare disease or condition,
proposed indication and use of the drug,
and the reasons why such therapy is needed
A description of the rare disease or condition for which the investigational drug is being or will be investigated for,
the proposed indication or indications for use of the drug, and the reasons why such therapy is needed. 21 CFR
316.20(b)(3)
, Description of the drug and scientiﬁc
rationale for use
Detailed description of investigational product; its physical and chemical properties, if these characteristics can be
determined; and a discussion of the scientiﬁc rationale, based either on nonclinical or clinical efﬁcacy data, to
establish a medically plausible basis for the use of the drug for the rare disease or condition. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(4)
, Orphan drug status Only applicable to the sponsor of a drug that is otherwise the same drug as an already approved drug seeks ODD
for the subsequent drug for the same rare disease or condition. If this is not applicable, provide a statement
accordingly in the application under this section. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(5)
, Patient subset considerations and medical
plausibility of the chosen subset
Only applicable to the sponsor of an ODD request for an investigational drug for only a subset of persons with a
particular disease or condition that otherwise affects 200,000 or more people (‘‘orphan subset’’). If this is not
applicable, provide a statement accordingly in the application under this section. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(6)
, Regulatory status and marketing history This section should include a summary of the regulatory status and marketing history of the drug in the United
States and in foreign countries. Include short description and assigned regulatory submission number to any
historical regulatory submissions. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(7)
, Documentation of patient population size Provide documentation that the investigational drug is either intended to treat a disease or condition aff ecting
fewer than a total of 200,000 people in the United States (prevalence); the investigational drug is intended to
treat an acute disease or condition affecting annually fewer than 200,000 people in the United States
(incidence); or, for a disease or condition affecting more than 200, 000 in the United States, provide
documentation that there is no reasonable expectation that costs of research and development of the drug for
the indication can be recovered by sales of the drug in the United States. 21 CFR 316.20(b)(8)
ODD, orphan drug designation.
Source: 21CFR 316, Subpart C—Designation of an Orphan Drug.
22
220 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 5 ---

Description of the rare disease or condition,
proposed indication and use of the drug,
and the reasons why such therapy is needed
The ODD application requires that an orphan disease
or condition targeted by the proposed product be clearly
described. To the extent possible, it is useful to describe
the clinical manifestations, pathophysiology, clinical course
(i.e., natural history), affected population (age range, age
of onset, and demographics), medical care and therapies
available to patients, disease mechanisms, and molecular
underpinnings of the disease.
For PCCA-related PA, we reviewed published litera-
ture and gathered expert opinions and information from
an NIH-conducted natural history study (NHS).
24,25 We
summarized the abovementioned sources to deﬁne the dis-
ease (PCCA-related PA) and included information pertinent
to its clinical manifestations and pathophysiology. Brieﬂy,
PA is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism for
which the affected enzyme, PCC, a ubiquitously expressed
mitochondrial enzyme, and its metabolic pathway for ami-
no- and fatty-acid catabolism are known.
26–28 PCC is a
multimeric enzyme, composed of alpha (PCCA) and beta
(PCCB) subunits, deﬁciency in either of which can result in
PCCA-a n d PCCB-related PA with identical clinical mani-
festations,29 and pathogenic variants in either subunit occur
with equal frequency. Each form of PA (PCCA- and PCCB-
related) is a life-threatening chronic condition, which usu-
ally ﬁrst manifests in the newborn period. Chronic mani-
festations of the disease are often punctuated by episodes of
metabolic decompensation.
Currently available therapies incompletely control the
disease, and there are no FDA-approved drugs for the
treatment of PA. It should be noted that the ODD was
requested speciﬁcally for the PCCA-related PA only, as
the gene replacement therapy targeting the alpha subunit
(AAV9-hPCCA) would only be expected to address the
PCCA-related form of PA and not have any effect on PA
caused by pathogenic variants in the PCCB gene (Section
3.1 in Supplementary File S1).
Description of the drug and scientiﬁc rationale
relevant to the disease/condition
The drug’s description, including active ingredient, drug
class/type, structure, physical and chemical properties,
route of administration (ROA), formulation, and manu-
facturer details, is of value to the ODD request. ODD is
generally conferred to the active moiety rather than the
product formulation; therefore, changes to the product for-
mulation should not generally affect ODD status.
30
Data demonstrating that the investigational drug prod-
uct has the ‘‘potential’’ or ‘‘promise’’ to treat, prevent, or
diagnose the intended disease or condition are critical.
Evidence supporting the scientiﬁc rationale, drug’s mech-
anism of action, and its relevance to the disease/condition
and efﬁcacy data through clinical and/or nonclinical
studies must be included. In cases where clinical data
and appropriate animal models don’t exist, in vitro data
along with supporting information such as drug’s mech-
anism of action, disease pathogenesis, and how the data
relate to the disease may be presented.
31–33
The gene therapy drug, AAV9-hPCCA, is an AAV9
vector expressing a functional human codon optimized
complementary DNA (cDNA) encodingPCCA. The AAV9-
hPCCA will deliver a functional copy of the human PCCA
gene, allow for expression of wild-type PCCA protein, and
help restore the PCC enzymatic activity. In our application,
we provided a schematic for the AAV9-hPCCA drug prod-
uct. In addition, we included descriptive information about
the transgene sequence, AAV vector, and the essential ele-
ments of the transgene (promoter, intron, etc.)w h i c hc o m -
prise the drug product (Section 4 in Supplementary File S1).
Since we submitted the ODD application in the pre-
clinical development phase, we relied on the inclusion
of nonclinical data for demonstrating drug efﬁcacy in a
PCCA-deﬁcient mouse model of PA.
We provided experimental details, including disease
model used, doses administered, and dosing regimen
(Section 4.2 in Supplementary File S1). AAV9-hPCCA
administration to a PCCA-deﬁcient mouse model of
PA showed increased survival, restored PCCA protein
expression, and improved metabolic parameters, all sup-
portive of the potential beneﬁts that AAV9-hPCCA
administration would produce in humans with PCCA-
related PA. It is important to note that safety or pharma-
cology/toxicology information would not support scien-
tiﬁc rationale and was not included in the ODD request.
While not available in our case, any clinical data available
in support of the scientiﬁc rationale could be included by a
sponsor. Such data can include but are not limited to the
study design, treatment population, dosing regimen and
ROA, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and outcome measures.
31
Details of the timing of study drug administration in relation
to the onset of the intended disease or condition should be
clariﬁed. In addition, if there is an already approved ‘‘same
drug,’’ supporting evidence to show clinical superiority of
the proposed drug as per FDA criteria is needed to obtain an
ODD.
10 To claim that a new drug is clinically superior and of
signiﬁcant beneﬁt, parameters such as a new formulation or
a different ROA will not be sufﬁcient; the sponsor must
address safety and efﬁcacy parameters and show major
beneﬁt of this drug in patient care.
34
Documentation of patient population size:
incidence versus prevalence
A population estimate of the proposed disease or con-
dition is quite important for the application and requires
that sufﬁcient evidence to support the orphan nature of
the disease or condition is provided to facilitate FDA’s
determination of whether a drug qualiﬁes for ODD.
22
In instances when a sponsor requests ODD for a drug
ORPHAN DRUG AND RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE DESIGNATION 221


--- Page 6 ---

for only a subset of persons with a particular disease or
condition that otherwise affects 200,000 or more people
(‘‘orphan subset’’), it is required to demonstrate that the
remaining persons with such disease or condition would
not be appropriate candidates for use of the drug.
22
FDA OOPD has provided recommendations on their
website detailing information required to designate a dis-
ease or condition as rare in the United States (Table 2).
Notably, the website states: ‘‘A Sponsor is expected to make
a good faith effort in ﬁnding the most recent prevalence data
that refers to US population.’’
35 An ODD is generally
granted based on prevalence which is deﬁned as the number
of persons in the United States who have been diagnosed as
having the disease or condition at the time of the submission
of the request. For a disease or condition with an acute onset
(i.e., <1-year duration), such as rare infections, poisonings,
or exposures (e.g., snake bites), incidence estimates can be
used. Incidence is deﬁned as the occurrence of new cases of
disease or injury in a population over a speciﬁed time.
There are several resources and databases that provide
patient population estimates. It is however important to
note that some of these may not have the most current
information. Therefore it is best to assemble data from
several sources to estimate the prevalence/incidence and
present the case in the application with appropriate infor-
mation and references to support it. Shourick et al also
provide details of how population estimates can be made
using literature quantiﬁcation.
36 We have outlined a general
search strategy for determining patient population size in
the United States (Fig. 2A). Orphanet, a database focused
on rare diseases, and Online Mendelian Inheritance in
Man (OMIM), a compendium of human genes and phe-
notypes are also publicly available sources of rare disease
information. In the United States, Newborn screening
(NBS) is conducted on a state-by-state basis with differ-
ences in disease lists for screening, as well as the methods
used to screen and identify patients and privacy policies.
37
Thus, to obtain NBS datasets or information, requests
may need to be directed to individual state authorities.
For determining the patient population size for PCCA-
related PA in the United States, we performed an extensive
literature search but did not ﬁnd reported population-based
prevalence studies (Fig. 2B). We did not access NBS da-
tabases directly, rather we surveyed literature summarizing
data from the NBS studies spanning multiple years in
different geographic regions within the United States or
outside to understand the worldwide birth incidence of
PA.
38–43 Furthermore, we ﬁltered the published informa-
tion to establish the birth incidence of PA speciﬁcally
within the United States. The U.S. incidence data were then
translated to estimate the prevalence using census data for
the total U.S. population.
44 In the general population,
PCCA- and PCCB-related forms of PA occur at a similar
frequency and, accordingly, we estimated the prevalence of
PCCA-related PA to be half of all PA patients. We gathered
expert opinion from clinicians and NHS24,25 to support the
ﬁnal estimated prevalence ofPCCA-related PA determined
to be between 50 and 1,981 patients in the United States
(Fig. 2B and Section 8 in Supplementary File S1).
Additional information
Although not formally requested in FDA regulations,
we included in our application package:
(1) a cover letter signed by the sponsor, providing a
brief description of the ODD application request,
including the investigational drug product and the
disease it is intended for;
(2) full reference articles.
Table 2. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan Products Development: population size estimate recommendations to support
designation of a disease or condition as rare in the United States
Population size estimate recommendations from FDA OOPD website
Besides referenced texts and journals, prevalence data for many rare diseases can be found on the internet at government and patient support group web sites. Copies of all
materials documenting how the prevalence estimate was made should be provided in the designation request. If the reference source is from a website, a hard copy of
the document should be included, as well as the website address. The date each website was accessed should also be provided for all website sources refe renced.
A sponsor is expected to make a good faith effort in ﬁnding the most recent prevalence data that refer to a U.S. population. If only old and/or foreign dat a are available, the
sponsor should explain this in the request. If data are old, the sponsor should explain why the data are still pertinent and, if from a foreign source, wh y data with that
country’s population could also be representative of U.S. population.
The sponsor should be reminded that the prevalence estimate must be current to reﬂect the prevalence at the time of submission of the request for ODD 21C FR x316.21.38
To update this estimate, the sponsor should use U.S. population data available from the U.S. Census Bureau. 28
Provide all calculations and cite references used to make the population estimate.
Estimate should be current at the time of the submission of the ODD request. U.S. Census Bureau data can be used to update any population estimate
When a range of estimates exists, FDA accepts only the largest estimate unless a justiﬁcation is provided why another estimate is more accurate.
If the drug is intended for diagnosis or prevention of a rare disease or condition, provide the estimated number of people to whom the drug will be admini stered annually.
If a disease is an acute condition ( i.e., <1 year duration) incidence may be used as an estimate of the population. However, note that if the disease is a relapsing/remitting
disease where each episode is acute in duration, a prevalence estimate may still be required.
If using data from a claims database or foreign data, clearly explain how such data are generalizable to the U.S. population and the limitations of the d ata.
The National Cancer Institute’s SEER Program is one recommended resource for determining cancer statistics in the United States. 39 A complete prevalence is required.
FDA, Food and Drug Administration; OOPD, Ofﬁce of Orphan Product Development; SEER, Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results.
Source: FDA OOPD. 35
222 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 7 ---

Information speciﬁc to Rare Pediatric Drug
Designation
We submitted our RPDD request a few months after
the ODD approval with much of the same information.
The RPDD application needed modiﬁcation of the request
statement and addition of an RPDD justiﬁcation state-
ment that included the serious nature of the disease, tar-
get population, and prevalence in relation to pediatric
patients.
APPLICATION SUBMISSION AND REVIEW
Once the designation application is ready, the general
process for FDA submission and review 10 is outlined
in Fig. 3. After submission, the sponsor (or their agent)
receives an acknowledgment letter which includes the
OOPD assigned designation request number. Following
the FDA OOPD review, a designation letter, a deﬁciency
letter requesting additional information, or a denial letter
is issued to the sponsor. The OOPD attempts to review
Figure 2. Documentation of population size. (A) General search strategy to document current patient population size in the United States; (B) steps taken for
determining current PA patient population size in the United States. PA, propionic acidemia; NBS, newborn screening; ODD, orphan drug designation.
ORPHAN DRUG AND RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE DESIGNATION 223


--- Page 8 ---

and provide a letter within 90 days from date of applica-
tion receipt. A RPDD request can be submitted contem-
poraneously with an ODD application or as a separate
proposal. RPDDs submitted at the same time as ODD
are reviewed by OOPD within 60 days of submission,
whereas RPDDs submitted separately are independently
assessed with no set timeline. We submitted the ODD
and RPDD applications separately and received our des-
ignation letters in 88 and 87 days, respectively.
Please note that as per the ODA, FDA publishes the
generic and/or trade name of a drug on their website after
ODD is granted.
45 FDA has provided exhaustive guidance
and advice for ODD and RPDD submissions, meetings,
content, and communications. Some of these resources
are provided in Table 3, and sponsors are urged to con-
sult the FDA OOPD website for the most up-to-date
information.
19
DISCUSSION
The ODD program offers ﬁnancial incentives for spon-
sors and has been shown to have a positive correlation with
innovation, investor valuation, and investments in rare dis-
ease research and development. 46 There have been 5,099
ODDs and 724 associated drug approvals, comprising both
unique and repurposed drugs, since the inception of the
program in 1983 until 2019.
47,48 We also searched the FDA
database Orphan Drug Designations and Approvals and
found 1,190 designations and 248 approvals from January
2020 until November 2022
49 suggesting a steady increase
in numbers in both categories. Drug approvals span several
therapeutic areas and are most concentrated in oncology
(34%), followed by metabolic and endocrine (15%) and
hematology (11%).
50 While the proportion of designa-
tions for biologics versus small molecules remain stable,48
approvals for biologics have almost doubled from 23% in
1980s to 41% in 2010s.
50 These trends suggest that the
ODA has led to important advancements in the number
of therapies being developed for treatment, prevention, and
diagnosis of rare diseases.
Utilizing keywords such as ‘‘adeno-associated,’’
‘‘AAV,’’ and ‘‘gene therapy,’’ we also searched for
ODDs in the FDA database, speciﬁc for AAV gene ther-
apy.
49 Upon manual curation of the datasets, we have
found *195 ODDs (Supplementary File S3). Until
now, there are three FDA approved AAV gene therapies,
Luxturna, Zolgensma, and Hemgenix, for treatments of a
rare retinal disorder (RPE65 mutation-associated retinal
dystrophy), spinal muscular atrophy, and hemophilia B,
respectively.
51 The observation that there are nearly ten
times the number of ODDs for AAV gene therapies com-
pared to approved products reﬂects a massive expansion
in the pipeline for new gene therapies, which is expected
to continually grow.
Figure 3. Overview of the submission process. The ODD application can be submitted to the FDA through different submission methods, following which an
acknowledgment letter is issued. After review of the application, a decision is made and communicated to the sponsor within 90 days of application rec eipt,
submission, and review.
Table 3. FDA resources, guidance, and advice for ODD
and RPDD applications
Topic Information Source
General advice OOPD website: FAQs 35
How to submit ODD request OOPD website 19
Recommended Tips for Creating an Orphan
Drug Designation Application
Webinar32 script33 and slides31
Meetings with OOPD Guidance 52
ODD Waivers, Reductions, and Refunds Guidance 12
FDA OOPD Grants OOPD website: Orphan
Products Grant Program 53
Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review
Voucher Program
Guidance17
Pediatric Subpopulations of Common
Diseases
Guidance54
Interpreting Sameness of Gene Therapy
Products Under the OD Regulations
Guidance20
URLs for the websites cited in the table are included in the right column
as well as available in the reference list.
FAQ, Frequently Asked Question, OD, Orphan Drug.
224 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 9 ---

Given the complexity of drug development, coordi-
nation among members across different disciplines,
including experimentalists, clinical disease experts, and
preclinical drug development scientists, has facilitated
the rapid preclinical development of an AAV9 gene ther-
apy for PA. We fully acknowledge that programs with less
support and expertise will require additional resources,
and need more time, to enable an ODD. For these reasons,
we plan to share the details of our regulatory documen-
tation to assist those developing therapeutics for rare dis-
eases. We believe that the dissemination activities of the
PaVe-GT program such as providing a blueprint of suc-
cessful ODD and RPDD applications as presented here
will reduce the time in drafting these applications and
improve their quality, making the process of getting such
designations granted more efﬁcient. These efforts will
beneﬁt academic and nonproﬁt drug developers and
advance rare disease drug development to improve the
health of a large population of patients with unmet medical
needs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors specially thank Jean Dehdashti for pro-
viding her regulatory expertise while drafting the ODD
application. The authors also thank Deanna Portero for
preparing the redacted ODD and RPDD ﬁles and Gabriela
Zamora for her efforts in coordinating and organizing
meetings associated with this article. The authors thank
the entire NIH PaVe-GT Team (in alphabetical order):
Gilberto V. Averion, Krishna Balakrishnan, Carsten G.
Bo¨ nnemann, Philip J. Brooks, Steven J. Burden, Eggerton
Campbell, Catherine Chen, Eun-Young Choi, Claire
Driscoll, Oksana Dukhanina, Susan Ferry, A. Reghan
Foley, Janelle Geist Hauserman, Lina Li, Donald C. Lo,
Venkata Mangalampalli, Irini Manoli, Christopher Men-
doza, Julien Oury, Forbes D. Porter, Deanna Portero, Lili
Portilla, Jachinta Rooney, Dimah Saade, Jennifer L. Sloan,
Mitali Tambe, Pramod Terse, Joshua Todd, London
Toney, Carol Van Ryzin, Rodica Stan, Sury Vepa, Erik
Wagner, Amy Wang, Xin Xu, and Yaqun Zou.
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
R.M.L., E.A.O., and A.R.P. contributed to the con-
ceptualization, methodology and writing of the initial
draft, reviewing, creating ﬁgures, and editing of the article.
O.S., R.J.C., and C.P.V. reviewed and edited the article.
The Orphan Drug and Rare Pediatric drug applications
used in this article are based on the original research of
O.S., R.J.C., and C.P.V., including design and conceptu-
alization of the orphan drug (AAV9-hPCCA), demon-
stration of preclinical efﬁcacy in animal models of PA,
and clinical research.
DISCLAIMER
The content of this article is solely the opinions of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial
views of the NIH.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURE
The authors have no competing interests relevant to this
article.
FUNDING INFORMATION
PaVe-GT is funded by the NCATS Cures Acceleration
Network. E.A.O. and R.M.L. are supported by the NCATS
Intramural Research Program (1ZIATR00281). R.J.C.,
O.S., and C.P.V. are supported by the Intramural Research
Program of the NHGRI, NIH (1ZIAHG200318-16).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary File S1
Supplementary File S2
Supplementary File S3
REFERENCES
1. Brooks PJ, Ottinger EA, Portero D, et al. The
Platform Vector Gene Therapies project: Increas-
ing the efﬁciency of adeno-associated virus gene
therapy clinical trial startup. Hum Gene Ther
2020;31:1034–1042.
2. US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA).
Search Orphan Drug Designations and Approvals.
Adeno-Associated Virus 9 Human Propionyl-CoA
Carboxylase, Alpha Subunit (AAV9-hPCCA). 2021.
Available from: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
scripts/opdlisting/oopd/detailedIndex.cfm?cfgridkey
=838121 [Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
3. 21CFR 316, Title 21, Chapter I, Subchapter D Part
312 Subpart A Deﬁnitions and Interpretations.
4. The Power of Being Counted. 2022. Available
from: https://rare-x.org/case-studies/the-power-
of-being-counted/ [Last accessed: November 30,
2022].
5. Haendel M, Vasilevsky N, Unni D, et al. How
many rare diseases are there? Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2020;19:77–78.
6. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM).
OMIM Gene Map Statistics. 2023. Available from:
https://www.omim.org/statistics/geneMap [Last
accessed: January 08, 2023].
7. National Institutes of Health National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences (NIH NCATS).
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
(GARD). FAQs About Rare Diseases. Available
from: https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/about [Last
accessed: January 08, 2023].
8. National Organization for Rare Disorders. Orphan
Drugs in the United States: An Examination of
Patents and Orphan Drug Exclusivity. A NORD
Commissioned Report with Avaler. 2021. Available
from: https://rarediseases.org/wp-content/uploads/
2021/03/NORD-Avalere-Report-2021_FNL-1.pdf
[Last accessed: November 30, 2022].
9. The Orphan Drug Act of 1983. Amended in 1984
for prevalence. Pub L. No. 97–414, 96 Stat. 2049.
1983.
ORPHAN DRUG AND RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE DESIGNATION 225


--- Page 10 ---

10. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan Pro-
duct Development (FDA OOPD). Designating an Or-
phan Product: Drugs and Biological Products. 2022.
Available from: https://www.fda.gov/industry/
medical-products-rare-diseases-and-conditions/
designating-orphan-product-drugs-and-biological-
products [Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
11. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 21, Part
316. Orphan Drugs.
12. FDA Guidance Document Prescription Drug User
Fee Act Waivers, Reductions, and Refunds for
Drug and Biological Products. 2011. Available
from: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/
search-fda-guidance-documents/user-fee-waivers-
reductions-and-refunds-drug-and-biological-products
[Last accessed: November 30, 2022].
13. Herder M. What is the purpose of the Orphan
Drug Act? PLoS Med 2017;14:e1002191.
14. Seoane-Vazquez E, Rodriguez-Monguio R,
Szeinbach SL, et al. Incentives for orphan drug
research and development in the United States.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 2008;3:33.
15. Aerts C, Barrenho E, Miraldo M, et al. The impact
of the Priority Review Voucher on research and
development for tropical diseases. Pharmaceut
Med 2022;36:189–197.
16. FDASIA. Publ. L. 112–144. 126 Stat. 993. Public
Law 112–144 112th Congress 2012.
17. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of
Orphan Product Development (FDA OOPD). Rare
Pediatric Disease Priority Review Vouchers. Gui-
dance for Industry. Draft Guidance, Revision 1.
2019.
18. Meyer RJ. Priority Review Vouchers: GAO report
provides scant evidence of success. Clin Transl Sci
2021;14:8–10.
19. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Ofﬁce of Orphan
Products Development. 2022. Available from:
https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/ofﬁce-clinical-policy-
and-programs/ofﬁce-orphan-products-development
[Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
20. Interpreting Sameness of Gene Therapy Products
Under the Orphan Drug Regulations. 2021. Available
from: https://www.fda.gov /regulatory-information/
search-fda-guidance-documents/interpreting-sameness-
gene-therapy-products-under-orphan-drug-regulations
[Last accessed: November 30, 2022].
21. 21CFR x316.23. Timing of requests for orphan-
drug designation; designation of already approved
drugs.
22. 21CFR 316, Subpart C—Designation of an Orphan
Drug. Section 316.20. Content and format of a
request for orphan-drug designation.
23. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Orphan Drug
Designation Request Form. Form FDA 4035. 2021.
Available from: https://www.fda.gov/industry/
designating-orphan-product-drugs-and-biological-
products/orphan-drug- designation-request-form
[Last accessed: November 30, 2022].
24. Shchelochkov OA, Manoli I, Juneau P, et al.
Severity modeling of propionic acidemia using
clinical and laboratory biomarkers. Genet Med
2021;23:1534–1542.
25. Shchelochkov OA, Manoli I, Sloan JL, et al.
Chronic kidney disease in propionic acidemia.
Genet Med 2019;21:2830–2835.
26. Adhikari AN, Gallagher RC, Wang Y, et al. The
role of exome sequencing in newborn screening
for inborn errors of metabolism. Nat Med 2020;
26:1392–1397.
27. Almasi T, Guey LT, Lukacs C, et al. Systematic
literature review and meta-analysis on the
epidemiology of propionic acidemia. Orphanet J
Rare Dis 2019;14:40.
28. Chapman KA, Gramer G, Viall S, et al. Incidence of
maple syrup urine disease, propionic acidemia,
and methylmalonic aciduria from newborn
screening data. Mol Genet Metab Rep 2018;15:
106–109.
29. Shchelochkov OA, Carrillo N, Venditti C. Propionic
Acidemia. In: GeneReviews
/C210 . (Adam MP, Ardinger
HH, Pagonet RA, et al. eds.) Seattle, WA, Gene
Reviews, 1993.
30. Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) About Designating
an Orphan Product. FAQ 14; 2019. Available from:
https://www.fda.gov/industry/designating-orphan-
product-drugs-and-biological-products/frequently-
asked-questions-faq-about-designating-orphan-product
[Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
31. Recommended Tips for Creating an Orphan Drug
Designation Application Slides. 2018. Available from:
chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglcleﬁnd
mkaj/https://www.fda.gov/media/111762/download
[Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
32. Recommended Tips for Creating an Orphan Drug
Designation Application Webinar. 2021. Available
from: https://collaboration.fda.gov/p7qz15qb11s/
?launcher=false&fcsContent=true&pbMode=normal
[Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
33. Recommended Tips for Creating an Orphan Drug
Designation Application Script. 2018. Available
from: chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcgl
cleﬁndmkaj/https://www.fda.gov/media/111624/
download [Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
34. 21CFR 316, Subpart D—Demonstration of Clinical
Superiority.
35. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Designating an
Orphan Product: Drugs and Biological Products.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) About Desig-
nating an Orphan Product. FAQ 8; 2019. Available
from: https://www.fda.gov/industry/designating-
orphan-product-drugs-and-biological-products/
frequently-asked-questions-faq-about-designating-
orphan-product [Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
36. Shourick J, Wack M, Jannot AS. Assessing rare
diseases prevalence using literature quantiﬁca-
tion. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2021;16:139.
37. Newborn Screening Translational Research Net-
work. (2001–2022 American College of Medical
Genetics and Genomics.). 2022. Available from:
https://nbstrn.org/tools/nbs-vr?tab=nbs-program-
information [Last accessed: January 08, 2023].
38. Comeau AM, Larson C, Eaton RB. Integration of
new genetic diseases into statewide newborn
screening: New England experience. Am J Med
Genet C Semin Med Genet 2004;125C:35–41.
39. Frazier DM, Millington DS, McCandless SE, et al.
The tandem mass spectrometry newborn screen-
ing experience in North Carolina: 1997–2005.
J Inherit Metab Dis 2006;29:76–85.
40. Naylor EW, Chace DH. Automated tandem mass
spectrometry for mass newborn screening for
disorders in fatty acid, organic acid, and amino
acid metabolism. J Child Neurol 1999;14(Suppl 1):
S4–S8.
41. Therrell BL, Jr., Lloyd-Puryear MA, Camp KM,
et al. Inborn errors of metabolism identiﬁed via
newborn screening: Ten-year incidence data and
costs of nutritional interventions for research
agenda planning. Mol Genet Metab 2014;113:
14–26.
42. Weisfeld-Adams JD, Morrissey MA, Kirmse BM,
et al. Newborn screening and early biochemical
follow-up in combined methylmalonic aciduria and
homocystinuria, cblC type, and utility of methio-
nine as a secondary screening analyte. Mol Genet
Metab 2010;99:116–123.
43. Zytkovicz TH, Fitzgerald EF, Marsden D, et al.
Tandem mass spectrometric analysis for amino,
organic, and fatty acid disorders in newborn dried
blood spots: A two-year summary from the New
England Newborn Screening Program. Clin Chem
2001;47:1945–1955.
44. US Census Bureau. US and World Population
Clock. Available from: https://www.census.gov/
popclock/ [Last accessed: April 21, 2021].
45. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Public Identiﬁ-
cation of Orphan Drug Designation. 2018. Available
from: https://www.fda.gov/industry/designating-
orphan-product-drugs-and-biological-products/
public-identiﬁcation-orphan-drug-designation [Last
accessed: January 08, 2023].
46. Miller KL. Do investors value the FDA orphan
drug designation? Orphanet J Rare Dis 2017;
12:114.
47. Miller KL, Fermaglich LJ, Maynard J. Using four
decades of FDA orphan drug designations to
describe trends in rare disease drug development:
Substantial growth seen in development of drugs
for rare oncologic, neurologic, and pediatric-onset
diseases. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2021;16:265.
48. Miller KL, Kraft S, Ipe A, et al. Drugs and biologics
receiving FDA orphan drug designation: An anal-
ysis of the most frequently designated products
and their repositioning strategies. Expert Opin
Orphan Drugs 2022;9:265–272.
49. Search Orphan Drug Designations and Approvals.
Available from: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
scripts/opdlisting/oopd/index.cfm [Last accessed:
November 30, 2022].
226 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 11 ---

50. Miller KL, Lanthier M. Investigating the landscape
of US orphan product approvals. Orphanet J Rare
Dis 2018;13:183.
51. Au HKE, Isalan M, Mielcarek M. Gene therapy
advances: A meta-analysis of AAV usage in clinical
settings. Front Med (Lausanne) 2021;8:809118.
52. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Meetings with
the Ofﬁce of Orphan Products Development. Gui-
dance for Industry, Researchers, Patients Groups,
and FDA Staff. 2015. Available from: https://
www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-
guidance-documents/meetings-ofﬁce-orphan-products-
development [Last accesssed: November 30, 2022].
53. Orphan Products Grants Program. 2021. Available
from: https://www.fda.gov/industry/medical-
products-rare-diseases -and-conditions/orphan-
products-grants-program [Last accessed: January
08, 2023].
54. Food and Drug Administration Ofﬁce of Orphan
Product Development (FDA OOPD). Clariﬁcation of
Orphan Designation of Drugs and Biologics for
Pediatric Subpopulations of Common Dis-
eases, 2017 Available from: https://www.fda.gov/
regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-
documents/clariﬁcation-orphan-designation-
drugs-and-biologics-pediatric-subpopulations-common-
diseases [Last accessed: November 30, 2022].
Received for publication December 9, 2022;
accepted after revision January 17, 2023.
Published online: January 24, 2023.
ORPHAN DRUG AND RARE PEDIATRIC DISEASE DESIGNATION 227