# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/70/Lomash et al. - 2025 - Adeno-Associated Virus Gene Therapy Development Early Planning and Regulatory Considerations to Adv.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

Adeno-Associated Virus Gene Therapy Development: Early Planning
and Regulatory Considerations to Advance the Platform Vector Gene
Therapy Program
Richa Madan Lomash,1 Jean Dehdashti,2 Oleg A. Shchelochkov,3 Randy J. Chandler,3 Lina Li,3 Irini Manoli,3
Jennifer L. Sloan,3 Pramod Terse,1 Xin Xu,1 Dimah Saade,4 Rodica Stan,1 PaVe-GT team,^ Philip J. Brooks,2
Donald C. Lo,1 Carsten G. Bönnemann,4 Charles P. Venditti,3 Anne R. Pariser,2 and Elizabeth A. Ottinger1,*
1Therapeutic Development Branch, Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), NIH, Rockvil le, Maryland, USA;
2Division of Rare Diseases Research and Innovation, NCATS, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA; 3Organic Acid Research Section, Metabolic Medicine Branch, National
Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; and 4Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
^See Acknowledgments.
Gene therapy development presents multiple challenges, and early planning is vital in the successful implementation of such
programs. The Platform Vector Gene Therapy (PaVe-GT) program is a National Institutes of Health (NIH) initiative develop-
ing adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene therapies for four low-prevalence rare diseases. Utilizing the platform-based
approach, the program aims to incorporate ef ﬁciencies throughout the preclinical and clinical development processes fol-
lowed by public dissemination of scienti ﬁc and regulatory learnings. Early in development, the establishment of a Target
Product Proﬁle (TPP) by the research team is a critical step to guide product development and align preclinical studies to clin-
ical objectives. Based on the speciﬁc needs of the investigational product as deﬁned in the TPP, an overall regulatory strategy
can then be outlined to meet the regulatory requirements for theﬁrst-in-human clinical trials. During the preclinical phase of
development, sponsors may request meetings with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to gather feedback on the
planned studies and regulatory strategy. To pave the way for PaVe-GT’s ﬁrst investigational AAV gene therapy lead candi-
date, AAV9-hPCCA, we sought early feedback from the FDA utilizing an INitial Targeted Engagement for Regulatory
Advice on CBER/CDER ProducTs (INTERACT) meeting. Here, we elaborate on the value of establishing a TPP and the
FDA INTERACT meeting by including our initial AAV9-hPCCA TPP, detailing our INTERACT meeting experience, pro-
viding all corresponding regulatory documentation, and highlighting lessons learned. The regulatory documents along with
templates developed by our program can also be found on the PaVe-GT website ( https://pave-gt.ncats.nih.gov/ ). This
communication aims to provide stakeholders with resources that can be applied to drug development programs in
establishing a viable regulatory path to clinical trial initiation.
Keywords: rare diseases, target product pro ﬁle, INTERACT meeting, gene therapy, PaVe-GT, propionic acidemia,
PCCA, AAV9
*Correspondence: Dr. Elizabeth A. Ottinger, Therapeutic Development Branch, Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing T ranslational Sciences
(NCATS), NIH, 9800 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. E-mail: elizabeth.ottinger@nih.gov
ª The Author(s) 2025. Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC-BY ]
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
HUMAN GENE THERAPY, VOLUME 36, NUMBERS 5 and 6
2025 by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/hum.2024.230 653
Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.
CLINICAL DEVELOPMENTS


--- Page 2 ---

INTRODUCTION
Gene therapy development is an advancing ﬁeld with
wide applicability for rare diseases, the majority of
which are monogenic.
1–3 The number of preclinical
and clinical gene therapy programs has increased sub-
stantially in recent years with 2070 gene therapies in
the biopharmaceutical industry pipeline of which 24%
are adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene therapies. 4,5 To
date, there have been AAV gene therapy approvals for
eight indications globally. 6,7 Despite advancements, the
development of gene therapies continues to present
challenges in access to expertise and resources, high
costs, product manufacturing, and navigation of numer-
ous regulatory requirements.
8,9
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) embarked upon a
gene therapy program called Platform Vector Gene Therapy
(PaVe-GT)
10 to test the hypothesis whether a platform
approach can increase efﬁciencies in preclinical studies and
clinical development. While implementing this program, the
PaVe-GT team is committed to public dissemination of all
learnings
10 (Fig. 1A). AAV has been selected as a platform
vector, and a multidisciplinary team has been assembled
(Fig. 1B) to strategize and execute the drug development
plans for four rare diseases — two organic acidemias and
two neuromuscular disorders. The team aims to incorporate
learnings moving from one product to the next, following an
integrated approach throughout preclinical and clinical
development using similar processes, study designs, and
regulatory pathway. The scienti ﬁc and regulatory knowl-
edge gained during the program ’s lifecycle and the proc-
esses adopted will be publicly disseminated to inform and
enable other gene therapy development programs.
The focus of this communication is to help readers under-
stand the signi ﬁcance of early planning during the drug
development process utilizing PaVe-GT ’s ﬁrst investiga-
tional gene therapy candidate, AAV9 human Propionyl-CoA
Carboxylase, alpha subunit (AAV9-hPCCA) or National
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)-
BL0746, as a case example. This paper emphasizes the
value of establishing a Target Product Pro ﬁle (TPP) and
having early interactions with the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA), speciﬁcally the INitial Targeted Engagement
for Regulatory Advice on Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research (CBER)/Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER) ProducTs (INTERACT) meeting. The
AAV9-hPCCA TPP, complete INTERACT package along
with FDA feedback is included in the supplemental infor-
mation, and the template used in drafting these documents
is posted on the PaVe-GT website.
BACKGROUND
The drug development process is complex, lengthy and
costly, and comes with the uncertainty of whether the lead
investigational candidate will be safe and effective in
patients. Reasons for failure can range from scienti ﬁca n d
strategic to operational and commercial issues.11 Scientiﬁc
Figure 1. Platform Vector Gene Therapy (PaVe-GT) approach. (A) To test the PaVe-GT hypothesis, our approach includes utilizing AAV as a platform vec-
tor, similar preclinical development processes, study designs, regulatory pathway and common clinical protocol elements, wherever possible. The diseases
under study in the PaVe-GT platform include four rare diseases. The two organic acidemias under study are propionic acidemi a (caused by PCCA de ﬁciency)
and isolated methylmalonic acidemia (MMAB de ﬁciency/cobalamin type B methylmalonic acidemia). The two congenital myasthenic syndromes under study
are COLQ de ﬁciency and DOK7 de ﬁciency. The outcomes of the program are being publicly shared on the PaVe-GT website. (B) The PaVe-GT team is com-
prised of basic researchers, disease and drug development experts supported by a strong project management team as depicted in the ﬁgure. All disciplines
work in coordination, and the coordinated efforts of all team members are instrumental for the success of the program.
654 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 3 ---

challenges include demonstrating ef ﬁcacy in appropriate
disease models, development of assays, complex manufac-
turing processes, and toxicology assessment.11–13 For rare
diseases, clinical trial design and endpoint selection are
difﬁcult due to poor understanding of disease biology,
phenotypic heterogeneity,14 lack of validated biomarkers,
incomplete understanding of disease natural history, and
small populations that often include pediatric patients14–16
With nearly 70% of rare diseases starting in childhood,15 it
can be challenging to establish proof of direct beneﬁti na n i -
mals and appropriately design safety studies in support of
the pediatric population. Furthermore, an insufﬁcient under-
standing of how preclinical studies translate toward a ﬁrst-
in-human (FIH) trial in accordance with regulatory require-
ments may result in roadblocks at various stages of the drug
development process. Based on our experience, failure to
incorporate regulatory planning early enough may lead to
delays in advancing a lead candidate to clinical testing.
Potential regulatory hurdles can arise from inadequate use
of publicly available FDA resources and precedence, sub-
mission of incomplete meeting packages to regulatory
authorities with respect to supporting scientiﬁc rationale and
data, and underutilization of FDA meetings and interactions
throughout product development. Operational delays range
from funding and timeline deviations to supply chain issues
and intellectual property challenges.13,17
T om a x i m i z eap r o g r a m’s success, it is critical to incorpo-
rate scientiﬁc expertise, project management and effective
risk mitigation strategies throughout the project lifecycle.
Ensuring alignment of study outcomes and their timing with
the regulatory considerations is important in the planning
and execution of Investigational New Drug (IND) enabling
studies during preclinical development.
Target product proﬁle (TPP)
Per the World Health Organization (WHO) de ﬁnition,
A ‘Target Product Proﬁle’(TPP) outlines the desired ‘pro-
ﬁle’or characteristic of a target product that is aimed at a
particular disease or diseases. 18 It is used as a common
project management and strategic tool to guide product
development
19,20 and facilitate regulatory submissions
and communications. A TPP is created with consideration
of the product labeling as preclinical and clinical programs
develop.
As illustrated in Figure 2A, a TPP consists of the prod-
uct’s characteristics and attributes, such as the disease indi-
cation, target population, safety and tolerability information,
dosage form and frequency, drug stability information, dos-
ing regimen and clinical efﬁcacy endpoints. Components of
a TPP are important to inform study parameters in preclini-
cal development, including but not limited to demonstrating
proof of direct beneﬁt in animal models, non-clinical toxi-
cology assessments, assay development, and the manufac-
turing process. Incorporating clinical considerations for a
lead candidate in the TPP early on better informs the design
of IND-enabling studies to streamline the preclinical drug
development process.
21 TPP is a living document where sci-
entiﬁc and regulatory aspects merge to drive programmatic
decisions, and it can be continually updated through the pro-
ject lifecycle. We have included the initial TPP for AAV9-
hPCCA as Supplementary Data S1. Additional resources
for creating a TPP are available.
22–25
Regulatory considerations: Strategy and interactions
An understanding of the available resources including
guidance documents and potential meetings with regula-
tory agencies throughout different stages of development
is crucial for advancing programs ef ﬁciently. Meetings
with the FDA can be utilized for gaining feedback and
concurrence on preclinical studies used in support of an
IND application and the initiation of a clinical trial. Early
interactions also help initiate a relationship between the
sponsor and the FDA review team. It is important to note
that the goal of both the sponsor and the FDA is to
advance the development of a lead candidate for clinical
testing to improve public health. During the preclinical
phase of development, sponsors have the option to
request different meetings with the agency ( e.g., INTER-
ACT and pre-IND) ( Fig. 2B ).
26 Engaging with the FDA
early during product development enables the sponsor to
implement feedback for any given area ( e.g., preclinical
models, manufacturing, toxicology studies, clinical proto-
col synopsis, etc.) and pivot where needed to ensure that
the development program meets regulatory requirements.
REGULATORY STRATEGY FOR AAV9-HPCCA
Upon completion of the preclinical proof-of-concept
(POC) studies for AAV9-hPCCA, 27 we utilized the FDA
INTERACT meeting to get advice and gain concurrence
on our development plan. The overall program strategy is
outlined in Figure 3A, and the following sections focus on
the team ’s INTERACT experience and takeaways for
AAV9-hPCCA.
INTERACT meeting
As stated in FDA SOPP 8101.1, 28 to qualify for an
INTERACT meeting, a sponsor must have selected a lead
investigational candidate to evaluate in a clinical study
since all questions and clariﬁcations stem from this product.
Qualiﬁed sponsors should utilize an INTERACT meeting
early in preclinical development, after completion (or near-
completion) of POC studies with their lead candidate.
Discussion topics during INTERACT include early product
characterization and manufacturing process; POC studies
and preclinical models; pilot safety, biodistribution studies,
and FIH study recommendations (desired patient population
age, route of administration, novel delivery devices, etc.)
(Fig. 3B).
28 To help understand the scope of INTERACT
meetings, the FDA has provided example questions and
topics as guidance for what is (or is not) appropriate for this
REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR AAV GENE THERAPY 655


--- Page 4 ---

meeting type.28 Failure to comply with the requirements
may lead to denial of an INTERACT meeting. The reasons
for denial vary from a package being de ﬁcient or project
stage being too premature or advanced.
29 Ar e q u e s tm a yb e
too advanced for an INTERACT meeting and more appro-
priate for a pre-IND meeting if, for example, a sponsor has
completed some safety studies and is at the point of design
and conduct of deﬁnitive toxicology studies. The FDA web-
site contains more information on common reasons for
denying INTERACT meetings.
29
Contents of the AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT meeting
request and package
The information included in an INTERACT package
may vary for each program depending on the stage of
development. An INTERACT package includes adminis-
trative information, lead investigational candidate details,
disease background, and a summary of the development
plan (including non-clinical, chemistry, manufacturing and
controls [CMC] information, clinical synopsis, and regula-
tory pathway). The questions included in the package for
feedback should be presented with appropriate technical
background and supportive scienti ﬁcd a t a .F o rA A V 9 -
hPCCA, we had conducted preliminary POC studies and
initiated CMC process development. The complete
AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT meeting request and brie ﬁng
package can be found in Supplementary Data S2. The
AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT package summary and
description of the program stage is detailed below and in
Figure 3C.
Figure 2. Regulatory milestones and TPP. (A) This ﬁgure highlights how each component of a TPP can inform various aspects of the preclinical devel-
opment program and assist in the study design and implementation to maximize program success and shorten the timeline. ROA: Route of administra-
tion. (B) After selection of a lead candidate, early establishment of a TPP as a guiding tool, in combination with stage appropriate regulatory
interactions, can be instrumental for successfully moving a program through the various phases of development. Regulatory interactions can be init i-
ated during early product development and continue until the IND submission, which is a signi ﬁcant milestone in the process and allows for the initia-
tion of the FIH trial. Late-stage product development also entails the TPP and continued regulatory interactions (Note: late-stages not discussed i nt h e
article).
656 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 5 ---

We included:
(1) In vivo POC studies: As a measure of ef ﬁcacy,
we presented results from Pcca knockout animals
showing improved survival and reduced levels of
the characteristic metabolite, plasma 2-methylci-
trate, after treatment with AAV9-hPCCA. We also
included transgene mRNA and protein expression
results from tissues of relevance.
(2) IND enabling GLP toxicology study plan: We
included the proposed study design, dosing regi-
men and planned measurements.
(3) Clinical information: Disease manifestations of
PCCA-related PA, with particular emphasis on
the selected pediatric patient population, ongoing
PA natural history study,
30–32 FIH clinical protocol
synopsis with study design and endpoints were
presented.
(4) CMC information : Information from the small-
scale feasibility batch was included to receive ini-
tial guidance on further process development and
manufacturing.
(5) PaVe-GT Platform: We detailed the platform
approach and discussed the possibility of leverag-
ing data across the four gene therapy products.
B a s e do nt h ei n f o r m a t i o na v a i l a b l ef o ro u rp r o g r a m ,q u e s -
tions were formulated in a manner that enabled gathering
advice speci ﬁc to AAV9-hPCCA in different technical
areas along with PaVe-GT platform-associated questions.
Unlike some other meeting types, the INTERACT meet-
ing request and brie ﬁng package are submitted concur-
rently.
28,29 (Fig. 3D).
Compilation and submission of the AAV9-hPCCA
INTERACT meeting request and package
We drafted the INTERACT package in-house, and to
help other groups, we have detailed our approach below. As
outlined in Figure 4A, we established the drug development
plan, conducted due diligence on available information, and
outlined the regulatory steps. This strategy helped us to
understand program-speciﬁc challenges and accordingly
formulate focused questions requiring feedback. Re ﬁning
the drug development plan was an iterative process, and
outlining the studies to support the planned clinical trial
required broad discussions and scenario analyses. Discus-
sions with individual subject matter experts (SMEs) across
disciplines (e.g., Biology, CMC, Toxicology, Clinical, and
Regulatory) helped incorporate granular details followed by
input from the larger team, to generate a comprehensive
package. We started adding information into our INTER-
ACT template
33 to produce an initial draft that went through
several rounds of review before ﬁnalizing. We utilized
FDA guidance34 and resources for developing the AAV9-
hPCCA drug development plan and compilation of our
package (Fig. 4B). A core project management team led the
Figure 3. Regulatory strategy for AAV9-hPCCA. (A) AAV9-hPCCA regulatory strategy is outlined. The ﬁrst milestone was an INTERACT meeting and
the feedback helped us move the program forward and prepare for a subsequent pre-IND meeting. For this program, FIH trials will commence after
(FDA)’s review of our IND (with receipt of an FDA safe-to-proceed) and completion of other necessary clinical steps. (B) INTERACT meeting goals, tim-
ing and topics within scope are speci ﬁed. (C) AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT package contents included in vivo POC study results, IND enabling Good
Laboratory Practice (GLP) toxicology study plan, CMC, and clinical information. (D) Logistical information related to the procedures and timelines for an
INTERACT meeting.
REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR AAV GENE THERAPY 657


--- Page 6 ---

overall effort by managing all communications, driving
discussions and drafting the package ( Fig. 4C ). Working
together with the technical leads, the core team was
instrumental in de ﬁning the overall development plan
and gathering information for the package. This team
e n s u r e dt h a tp r o p o s e ds t u d i e sw e r ea l i g n e dw i t ht h eT P P
characteristics, and that package preparation was
achieved ef ﬁciently. The complete process for compil-
ing and submitting the AAV9-hPCCA package took
approximately 5 months, and the steps are listed in
Figure 4D . Following the submission, the FDA
acknowledged receipt of the INTERACT package and
provided a meeting date.
After the INTERACT meeting for AAV9-hPCCA in
2021, there have been a few changes to the FDA process,
which are selectively highlighted.
26,28,29 Per the 2023 Pre-
scription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) reauthorization
performance goals and procedures, INTERACT meeting
conﬁrmation or denial will now be issued within 21 calen-
dar days of FDA’s receipt of the meeting request and pack-
age, and the meeting will be scheduled within 75 calendar
days. The FDA also informs the sponsor if reviewers from
speciﬁc discipline areas are unable to participate in the
meeting.28 The FDA sends preliminary responses to the
sponsor, and if, based on the teleconference discussion,
the FDA advice changes, the written responses will be
annotated and resent ( Fig. 3D ). For sponsors requesting
written responses only, the initial written responses will
serve as the ﬁnal FDA meeting minutes.
FDA review and INTERACT meeting preparation
To accommodate for the short timeframe between receiv-
ing FDA preliminary comments and for the sponsor to pro-
vide a response to FDA with selected topics for discussion,
proactive preparation is critical. We initially held internal
meetings with SMEs to discuss potential responses from the
FDA and our responses. After receiving FDA preliminary
comments, we selected the topics most critical to the pro-
gram to maximize the beneﬁt from the scheduled meeting.
For example, based on FDA preliminary comments, the
team determined the need to elaborate on the natural history
and disease progression in the pediatric and adult patient
populations. We prepared slides highlighting questions of
interest, corresponding FDA comments, our responses and
supporting information, as applicable. We identiﬁed a meet-
ing moderator from the core team and technical leads who
would actively participate in the meeting. We started our
meeting with short introductions of the moderator and core
team (5 min) followed by discussion (45 min). The last
10 min were utilized by the NCATS moderator to summa-
rize the meeting and con ﬁrm the key takeaways with the
FDA. Since sponsor meetings with the Agency cannot be
recorded and the FDA does not issue formal INTERACT
meeting minutes, it is advisable that sponsors take detailed
Figure 4. Approach utilized by the PaVe-GT team for the INTERACT package preparation. (A) Our process for compilation of the package can be divided
into three stages: strategy, implementation, and documentation. (B) FDA resources valuable for INTERACT package preparation and de ﬁning the drug devel-
opment plan are included along with hyperlinks. (C) The core project management team led the drafting and package preparation working closely with the
technical leads, regulatory experts, and clinicians. (D) Steps and timeline of AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT pack age preparation: Upon initial due diligence and
planning, we held a kick-off meeting to inform all team members of the scope and content of an INTERACT meeting request and package. Subsequently, we
discussed in smaller and larger groups to generate an initial draft of questions along with a supporting summary. Open dialogue and discussions were
needed to solidify the development plan and ﬁnalize section drafts. The ﬁnal stages included reviewing the complete package, editing, and formatting.
658 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 7 ---

notes, making certain all outcomes and/or action items
reached during the meeting are accurately captured and
summarized at the end of the teleconference.
INTERACT written responses and teleconference
major takeaways
A summary of the preliminary responses prior to
the teleconference is provided below and in Figure 5 ;
detailed responses can be found in Supplementary
Data S2.
1. FDA gave speci ﬁc feedback and concurred with
our POC data. FDA also gave advice on the type of
preclinical immunogenicity information needed for
the Pharmacology/toxicology studies. While we
presented our proposed, GLP toxicology study
plan, FDA deferred review of these studies for later
(pre-IND meeting).
2. FDA provided advice on CMC process development,
GMP manufacturing, quality attributes, potency assay
and device compatibility studies.
3. We received feedback on the clinical trial design,
speciﬁcally the target population age range.
Our discussions during the INTERACT teleconfer-
ence revolved around the relevance of transgene immu-
nogenicity testing in the assessment of human safety,
disease manifestations and diagnostic tests (Q4 and
Q5a, d and e, Supplementary Data S2). We gained fur-
ther clarity and concurrence from the FDA on these
topics ( Fig. 5 ). The feedback gathered from written
responses and subsequent teleconference discussion has
been helpful to make decisions for our gene therapy
program.
Apart from product-speci ﬁc feedback ( Fig. 5 ), some
of the notable learnings related to the PaVe-GT platform
approach include:
1. FDA tentatively agreed that capsid-related biodistri-
bution and anti-drug antibody data from the ﬁrst
product can be leveraged to support same serotype
products in the PaVe-GT platform within the speci-
ﬁed considerations as detailed in File S2 (response
to Questions 9).
2. After the teleconference discussion, FDA tentatively
agreed that cellular immunogenicity assessment is
needed for capsid only, while humoral immunogenic-
ity must be tested for capsid and transgene. In addi-
tion, FDA suggested saving blood samples to analyze
transgene cellular immune response, if required later.
This feedback is an important step toward incorporat-
ing efﬁciencies as we streamline the development of mul-
tiple AAV gene therapies in the PaVe-GT program and
for the broader ﬁeld as well.
DISCUSSION
The success rate of translating basic science experiments
to clinical studies is low due to several challenges 13,17 and
Figure 5. Major takeaways from the AAV9-hPCCA INTERACT meeting experience. The left panel shows the major steps in the FDA process for review of
the INTERACT meeting package. Upon reviewing our package, FDA provided feedback in the form of preliminary written responses (top panel). A few
selected topics were discussed during the teleconference and major takeaways from the discussion during the INTERACT meeting are listed (bottom pan el).
REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR AAV GENE THERAPY 659


--- Page 8 ---

a well-planned drug development program can help to
maximize clinical translation. As a sponsor embarks on the
journey of developing a new therapeutic, a TPP can serve
as a roadmap to guide decision-making and planning for
studies at different stages of development. Overall, TPPs
can have a positive impact by providing a strategic tool to
improve regulatory outcomes.
35–37 We highly encourage
other sponsors to prepare a TPP at the program ’s outset,
where keeping the end in mind will help them work with
regulatory bodies in navigating through preclinical and
clinical development.
Given the complexity and unique challenges that each
drug development program presents, gaining regulatory
concurrence early and consistently in development is ben-
eﬁcial.
38 Both the TPP and INTERACT meetings helped
advance AAV9-hPCCA development, ensuring that pre-
clinical studies are aligned and that regulatory require-
ments are understood prior to moving the program
towards IND-enabling studies. We gained concurrence
on our POC data (animal model selection, route of admin-
istration and endpoints) in support of the planned FIH
studies. Since we had provided limited manufacturing
information, FDA shared general CMC advice. While
this was instrumental in advancing the manufacturing of
our lead candidate, we learned that sharing complete
information is essential for getting precise feedback spe-
ciﬁc to the lead candidate being manufactured. FDA also
reviewed our clinical trial design and gave guidance on
patient selection, an area of great signi ﬁcance given the
struggles with conducting clinical trials in rare diseases
affecting the pediatric population. Guidance regarding
diagnostic tests and immunogenicity studies has been
beneﬁcial in planning the future studies.
INTERACT meetings were introduced in 2018 and ini-
tially limited to CBER;
39 the recently enacted PDUFA VII
extends the INTERACT meetings to CDER as well and cat-
egorizes these as formal meetings.
28 For a productive discus-
sion, it is very important to plan and prepare for regulatory
meetings ( Fig. 6 ).
40,41 Given that only one INTERACT
meeting is granted per program, it will be most prudent for
the sponsor to focus on product-speci ﬁc issues and
challenges. It is best to refer to available FDA guidance
beforehand, formulate questions accordingly, and seek feed-
back on any issues pertaining to the critical studies. Usually,
a thorough package and well-formulated questions will
result in precise and valuable FDA feedback. Wherever pos-
sible, it is best to formulate questions or present a strategy
with rationale in the form of a request and ask for concur-
rence rather than recommendations or decisions from the
FDA.
A key goal of the PaVe-GT program is to test the hypoth-
esis of whether using AAV as a platform vector, and if, by
following similar processes, we will be able to incorporate
efﬁciencies and streamline the regulatory path for multiple
AAV gene therapies until IND submission. In response to
one of our questions, the FDA stated the possibility to lever-
age capsid-related biodistribution data for the second PaVe-
GT product utilizing the same AAV serotype. To beneﬁtt h e
larger AAV community, we also plan to make our regula-
tory packages including FDA responses publicly available.
This illustrates a unique feature of PaVe-GT with our ability
to openly share project information because all parties are
US government employees. The PaVe-GT program contin-
ues to release their experience and learnings to the public.
We recently disseminated the regulatory documentation of
Orphan Drug and Rare Pediatric Disease Designations,
Figure 6. Do’s and don ’ts during early regulatory interactions. For a productive discussion, it is important to plan and prepare for regulatory interac-
tions. These are suggested do ’s and don ’ts based on our experience.
660 LOMASH ET AL.


--- Page 9 ---

FDA incentives for rare disease drug development. 27
As the PaVe-GT program moves forward, we will con-
tinue to propose and share gene therapy development
efﬁciencies. Experience from subsequent FDA interac-
tions such as pre-IND meeting and IND documentation
will be shared as our program advances to those stages
in the coming years. Through the sharing of our
approach and blueprint of an INTERACT application
package, we hope to assist all stakeholders in develop-
ing therapeutics for rare diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank London Toney for
preparing the template. The authors thank past and
present members of the entire NIH PaVe-GT Team
(in alphabetical order): Gilberto V. Averion, Krishna
Balakrishnan, Steven J. Burden, Eggerton Campbell,
Catherine Chen, Eun-Young Choi, Claire Driscoll,
Oksana Dukhanina, Susan Ferry, A. Reghan Foley,
Janelle Geist Hauserman, Venkata Mangalampalli,
Christopher Mendoza, Asvelt Nduwumwami, Julien
Oury, Forbes D. Porter, Deanna Portero, Lili Portilla,
Jachinta Rooney, Mitali Tambe, Joshua Todd, London
Toney, Carol Van Ryzin, Sury Vepa, Erik Wagner,
Amy Wang, and Yaqun Zou.
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
R.M.L., J.D. and E.A.O., contributed to the conceptuali-
zation, methodology and writing of the initial draft,
reviewing, creating ﬁgures, and editing the article. All
other authors reviewed and edited the article. The
INTERACT meeting package and request used in this
article are based on the original research of O.S., R.J.C.,
L.L., I.M., J.L.S., and C.P.V. including design and concep-
tualization of AAV9-hPCCA, demonstration of preclinical
efﬁcacy in animal models of PA, and clinical research.
DISCLAIMER
The content of this article is solely the opinions of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the of ﬁcial
views of the NIH, nor does mention of the commercial
products, and organizations imply endorsement by the
United States government.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors have no competing interests relevant to
this article.
FUNDING INFORMATION
PaVe-GT is funded by the NCATS Cures Acceleration
Network. R.M.L., P.T., X.X., R.S., D.C.L. and E.A.O. are
supported by NCATS Intramural Research Program
(1ZIATR00281). R.J.C., O.S., L.L., J.L.S., I.M. and
C.P.V. are supported by Intramural Research Program of
the NHGRI (1ZIAHG200318). D.S. and C.G.B. are sup-
ported by the NINDS Intramural Research Program
(1ZIANS003129-14).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Data S1
Supplementary Data S2
REFERENCES
1. Jensen TL, Gotzsche CR, Woldbye DPD. Current
and future prospects for gene therapy for rare
genetic diseases affecting the brain and spinal
cord. Front Mol Neurosci 2021;14:695937; doi:
10.3389/fnmol.2021.695937
2. Maldonado R, Jalil S, Wartiovaara K. Curative
gene therapies for rare diseases. J Community
Genet 2021;12(2):267–276; doi: 10.1007/s12687-
020-00480-6
3. Wang Y, Hu LF, Zhou TJ, et al. Gene therapy
strategies for rare monogenic disorders with
nuclear or mitochondrial gene mutations.
Biomaterials 2021;277:121108; doi: 10.1016/j
.biomaterials.2021.121108
4. Chancellor D, Barrett D, Nguyen-Jatkoe L, et al.
The state of cell and gene therapy in 2023. Mol
Ther 2023;31(12):3376–3388; doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe
.2023.11.001
5. Lapteva L, Purohit-Sheth T, Serabian M, et al.
Clinical development of gene therapies: The
ﬁrst three decades and counting. Mol Ther
Methods Clin Dev 2020;19:387 –397; doi: 10
.1016/j.omtm.2020.10.004
6. Wang JH, Gessler DJ, Zhan W, et al. Adeno-
associated virus as a delivery vector for gene
therapy of human diseases. Signal Transduct
Target Ther 2024;9(1):78; doi: 10.1038/s41392-
024-01780-w
7. U.S. Food and Drug Administration “Approved
Cellular and Gene Therapy Products ”. Silver
Spring MD; 2024. Available from: https://www
.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/cellular-gene-
therapy-products/approved-cellular-and-gene-
therapy-products [Last accessed: October 30,
2024].
8. Colella P, Ronzitti G, Mingozzi F. Emerging
issues in AAV-Mediated in vivo gene therapy.
Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev 2018;8:87 –104; doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2017.11.007
9. Jiang Z, Dalby PA. Challenges in scaling up
AAV-based gene therapy manufacturing. Trends
Biotechnol 2023;41(10):1268–1281; doi: 10.1016/
j.tibtech.2023.04.002
10. Brooks PJ, Ottinger EA, Portero D, et al. The
platform vector gene therapies project: Increas-
ing the ef ﬁciency of adeno-associated virus
gene therapy clinical trial startup. Hum Gene
Ther 2020;31(19 –20):1034–1042; doi: 10.1089/
hum.2020.259
REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR AAV GENE THERAPY 661


--- Page 10 ---

11. Arrowsmith J, Miller P. Trial watch: Phase II and
phase III attrition rates 2011-2012. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2013;12(8):569; doi: 10.1038/nrd4090
12. Sun D, Gao W, Hu H, et al. Why 90% of clinical
drug development fails and how to improve it?
Acta Pharm Sin B 2022;12(7):3049 –3062; doi:
10.1016/j.apsb.2022.02.002
13. Seyhan AA. Lost in translation: The valley of
death across preclinical and clinical divide —
identiﬁcation of problems and overcoming obs-
tacles. Transl Med Commun 2019;4(1).
14. Stoller JK. The challenge of rare diseases.
Chest 2018;153(6):1309 –1314; doi: 10.1016/j
.chest.2017.12.018
15. Nguengang Wakap S, Lambert DM, Olry A,
et al. Estimating cumulative point prevalence of
rare diseases: Analysis of the Orphanet data-
base. Eur J Hum Genet 2020;28(2):165 –173;
doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0508-0
16. Griggs RC, Batshaw M, Dunkle M, et al; Rare
Diseases Clinical Research Network. Clinical
research for rare disease: Opportunities, chal-
lenges, and solutions. Mol Genet Metab 2009;
96(1):20–26; doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.10.003
17. Sheena M, Posey Norris DEP, Davis M, et al.
Drug Development Challenges. Nataional Aca-
demies Press; 2014.
18. Organization WH. World Health Organization
“Target Product Proﬁles”. Available from: https://
www.who.int/observatories/global-observatory-
on-health-research-and-development/analyses-
and-syntheses/target-product-proﬁle/who-target-
product-proﬁles
19. Bandyopadhyay A. Target product pro ﬁle: A
planning tool for the drug development. Bioe-
quivalence & Bioavailability 2017;3(4).
20. Agency Information Collection Activities; Sub-
mission for Of ﬁce of Management and Budget
Review; Comment Request; Draft Guidance for
Industry and Review Staff on Target Product
Proﬁle. A Strategic Development Process Tool:
North Bethesda, MD; 2017.
21. Stegemann S, Sheehan L, Rossi A, et al.
Rational and practical considerations to guide a
target product pro ﬁle for patient-centric drug
product development with measurable patient
outcomes— A proposed roadmap. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm 2022;177:81 –88; doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb
.2022.06.006
22. National Institutes of Health ”NIH Seed: Creat-
ing a Target Product Pro ﬁle for New Drug Prod-
ucts”. Bethesda, MD; 2024.
23. National Institutes of Health Blueprint “Example
Target Product Proﬁle”. 2024.
24. National Institutes of Health “CREATE Bio Exam-
ple: Target Product Proﬁle”.B e t h e s d a ,M D ;2 0 2 2 .
Available from: https://www.ninds.nih.gov/
current-research/research-funded-ninds/
translational-research/create-bio/create-bio-
application-support-library/create-bio-example-
target-product-proﬁle-tpp [Last accessed: Novem-
ber 8, 2024].
25. Bukini D, Makani J, McCune J, et al. Consen-
sus-driven target product pro ﬁles for curative
sickle cell disease gene therapies. Mol Ther
Methods Clin Dev 2024;32(3):101287; doi: 10
.1016/j.omtm.2024.101287
26. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Formal
Meetings Between the FDA and Sponsors or
Applicants of PDUFA Products ”. Silver Spring,
MD; 2023. Available from: https://www.fda
.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-
guidance-documents/formal-meetings-between-
fda-and-sponsors-or-applicants-pdufa-products
[Last accessed: November 8, 2024].
27. Lomash RM, Shchelochkov O, Chandler RJ, et al;
NIH PaVe-GT Team. Successfully navigating
food and drug administration orphan drug and
rare pediatric disease designations for AAV9-
hPCCA gene therapy: The national institutes of
health platform vector gene therapy experience.
Hum Gene Ther 2023;34(5 –6):217–227; doi: 10
.1089/hum.2022.232
28. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “SOPP
8101.1: Regulatory Meetings with Sponsors and
Applicants for Drugs and Biological Products ”.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Silver
Spring MD; 2024.
29. U.S. Food and Drug Administartion. “OTP
INTERACT Meetings”. Silver Spring, MD; 2024.
Available from: https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-
blood-biologics/cellular-gene-therapy-products/
otp-interact-meetings [Last accessed: November
8, 2024].
30. Shchelochkov OA, Farmer CA, Chlebowski C,
et al. Intellectual disability and autism in propi-
onic acidemia: A biomarker-behavioral investi-
gation implicating dysregulated mitochondrial
biology. Mol Psychiatry 2024;29(4):974 –981;
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02385-5
31. Shchelochkov OA, Manoli I, Juneau P, et al.
Severity modeling of propionic acidemia using
clinical and laboratory biomarkers. Genet Med
2021;23(8):1534–1542; doi: 10.1038/s41436-021-
01173-2
32. Shchelochkov OA, Manoli I, Sloan JL, et al.
Chronic kidney disease in propionic acidemia.
Genet Med 2019;21(12):2830–2835; doi: 10.1038/
s41436-019-0593-z
33. National Institutes of Health “PaVe-GT: Plat-
form Vector Gene Therapy ”. 2020. Available
from: https://pave-gt.ncats.nih.gov/ [Last
accessed: November 8, 2024].
34. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Search for
FDA Guidance Documents ”. Silver Spring, MD.
2024. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/
regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-
documents [Last accessed: November 5, 2024].
35. Breder CD, Du W, Tyndall A. What ’s the regula-
tory value of a target product pro ﬁle? Trends
Biotechnol 2017;35(7):576 –579; doi: 10.1016/j
.tibtech.2017.02.011
36. Harrison RK. Phase II and phase III failures:
2013-2015. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2016;15(12):
817–818; doi: 10.1038/nrd.2016.184
37. Tyndall A, Du W, Breder CD. Regulatory watch:
The target product pro ﬁle as a tool for regula-
tory communication: Advantageous but under-
used. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2017;16(3):156; doi:
10.1038/nrd.2016.264
38. Blin O, Lefebvre MN, Rascol O, et al. Orphan
drug clinical development. Therapie 2020;75(2):
141–147; doi: 10.1016/j.therap.2020.02.004
39. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “FDA In
Brief: FDA announces program to enhance
early communications with biological product
developers”. Silver Spring, MD; 2018. Avail-
able from: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/
fda-brief/fda-brief-fda-announces-program-
enhance-early-communications-biological-
product-developers [Last accessed: October 30,
2024].
40. Baldrick P. Successful regulatory agency inter-
action - A nonclinical regulatory strategist ’s per-
spective. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2022;130:
105130; doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2022.105130
41. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. “Best
Practices for Communication Between IND
Sponsors and FDA During Drug Development
Guidance for Industry and Review Staff ”.U . S .
Food and Drug Administration: Silver Spring,
MD; 2017.
Received for publication November 12, 2024;
accepted after revision December 24, 2024.
Published online: February 20, 2025.
662 LOMASH ET AL.