# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/74/Moon et al. - 2024 - Aligning Orphanet Classification to Identify Disease Characteristics among Rare Disease Clusters.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

Aligning Orphanet Classification to Identify Disease 
Characteristics among Rare Disease Clusters
Sungrim Moon,
Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences National 
Institutes of Health Rockville, Maryland, USA
Jessica Maine,
Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences National 
Institutes of Health Rockville, Maryland, USA
Ewy Mathe,
Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences National 
Institutes of Health Rockville, Maryland, USA
Qian Zhu
Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences National 
Institutes of Health Rockville, Maryland, USA
Abstract
Understanding the underlying etiologies of rare diseases may facilitate research across multiple 
conditions, enabling basket trail design and drug repurposing. In this study, we aligned clusters 
of rare diseases with Orphanet classifications to represent their shared etiologies and establish a 
foundation for further investigation on underly biological mechanism discovery. By utilizing the 
linearized Orphanet categories, we connected 35 clusters of rare diseases into 18 classifications. 
Significant associations were found between the categories “Rare Developmental Defects During 
Embryogenesis” and “Rare Inborn Errors of Metabolism” and the clusters in this study, suggesting 
that many rare diseases originating in the prenatal period or related to metabolism may present a 
substantial opportunity for success in future investigation.
Keywords
rare disease; disease cluster; Orphanet classification; rare disease characteristics
I. Introduction
Rare diseases impact a limited number of individuals, explicitly affecting fewer than 
200,000 individuals in the United States or fewer than 1 in 2,000 individuals in Europe 
[1,2]. Due to the wide variety of disease presentations, rare diseases often involve lengthy 
diagnostic processes and may go undiagnosed or misdiagnosed, presenting significant 
Sungrim.Moon@nih.gov . 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 
2025 September 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). 2024 December ; 2024: 4561–4563. doi:10.1109/
bibm62325.2024.10822379.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 2 ---

challenges [3,4]. Furthermore, many rare diseases have few effective treatment options and 
incur high medical costs due to associated complications [5,6]. To tackle those challenges, 
various research and treatment strategies for multiple rare diseases simultaneously, such as 
basket clinical trials or drug repurposing, can be effective, specifically shared underlying 
causal factors of targeting rare diseases [7].
Our preliminary study demonstrated that clusters of rare diseases can be formed based on 
their underlying causal genes and pathophysiology [8]. These clusters were created using 
graph node embeddings derived from a knowledge graph that analyzed the overlap between 
rare diseases tracked by the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD) [9] 
and Orphanet [10], enriched with additional information on small molecules and biological 
pathways. However, the clusters produced from this study are associated with broad scopes. 
For instance, some clusters encompass more than 100 diseases, which has limitations in 
etiologies.
The Orphanet classification is a multi-hierarchical system for classifying rare diseases based 
on clinical criteria and medical specialties [10]. It considers factors such as clinical features, 
etiology, affected systems, and the genetic basis of the diseases [11]. In this study, we 
systematically aligned clusters of rare diseases with the Orphanet classification to reveal 
their underlying etiologies within or between the cluster and provide a way to utilize shared 
mechanisms in future approaches such as basket clinical trials or drug repurposing.
II. Method
A. Dataset
Our previous study resulted in 37 distinct clusters of rare diseases, with each cluster 
averaging 87 diseases (mean 87.62, standard deviation 30.23, and median 83), totaling 3,242 
diseases. Each rare disease is associated with a GARD ID, and a disease name represented 
as a string.
We used three Orphanet classification systems. The first is the Orphanet Rare Disease 
Ontology (ORDO), which provides a structured vocabulary for rare diseases [12]. This 
ontology includes the classification of rare diseases (ORPHA code), relationships between 
diseases and genes, and connections to other terminologies and databases in OWL format 
(ORDO_en_4.3.owl). The second, “Rare Diseases and Alignment with Terminologies and 
Databases,” provides references for various terminologies (en_product1_new.xml) [13]. 
The third one is the Orphanet linearization (en_product7.xml) [14]. This linearization 
classification is designed to manage rare diseases from a mono-hierarchical perspective, 
where each disease is assigned to a single medical specialty. Linearization parents are 
selected from the classification’s top entities (n=31) [15]. We connected rare diseases 
to Orphanet linearization classifications to simplify the complex representation of their 
underlying etiologies.
B. ORPHA code Identification for GARD rare diseases
Two steps were employed to identify the ORPHA code for each rare disease: reference 
matching and string matching. We utilized reference information associated with the GARD 
Moon et al. Page 2
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 3 ---

ID, ORPHA code, and other relevant terminology codes (such as ICD, UMLS, OMIM, 
etc.) by searching the linked data in the <reference> notation within the “Rare Diseases 
and Alignment with Terminologies and Databases” file. If the reference matching failed, 
we proceeded with string matching. The string matching involved searching for the GARD 
disease name in the <label> and <alternative term> notations in the ORDO XML file for the 
corresponding ORPHA code.
C. Linearization classification mapping
We assigned the linearized class to each GARD rare disease based on the mapped ORPHA 
codes from the above step.
D. Enrichment analysis
We performed Fisher’s exact test [16] for each cluster, comparing the counts of linearized 
classifications within that cluster against those in the other clusters. Fisher’s exact test was 
used to assess non-random associations between categorical variables in small sample sizes. 
TABLE I is a contingency table used for Fisher’s exact test. Fisher’s exact test results were 
adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, with an alpha 
level of 0.01, applying the false discovery rate method to identify significant associations 
while limiting the proportion of false positives. The enrichment results are visualized as 
Sankey diagrams, illustrating the relationships between diseases in the clusters and orphaned 
linearized classifications using the Plotly library in Python [17].
III. Result
The disease mapping results between GARD and Orphanet were successful for 3,242 out of 
3,260 rare diseases, representing a 99.44% match.
By enriching linearized classifications, we were able to map 35 out of 37 clusters to 
18 Orphanet linearized classes. As shown in Fig. 1, the majority of these clusters were 
enriched to two specific linearized classifications, “Rare Developmental Defects During 
Embryogenesis (ORPHA93890)” with 10 clusters and “Rare Inborn Errors of Metabolism 
(ORPHA68367)” with 7 clusters.
A single cluster may correspond to one or multiple linearized Orphanet classifications. For 
instance, the diseases in Cluster 17 encompass all relevant visual organs and associated eyes, 
leading to its sole linearized classification as a “Rare Ophthalmic Disease (ORPHA97966)” 
exclusively. In the case of Cluster 2, about half of the diseases corresponded to “Rare 
Systemic or Rheumatologic Diseases (ORPHA98023),” while the other half were linked to 
“Rare Infectious Diseases (ORPHA68416)”. This suggests that the rare diseases in Cluster 
2 may exhibit a nuanced connection between rheumatologic diseases and infectious diseases 
like Infection-Induced Arthritis (e.g., Rheumatic Fever, GARD:0005699) or Autoimmune 
Responses in rheumatologic conditions (e.g., Adult-onset Still’s disease, GARD:0000436).
Among the unmapped linearized classifications in our clusters, some are related to surgical 
diseases, such as “Rare Surgical Cardiac Disease (ORPHA97965),” “Rare Surgical Thoracic 
Disease (ORPHA97962),” “Rare Abdominal Surgical Disease (ORPHA17578),” and “Rare 
Moon et al. Page 3
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 4 ---

Maxillo-Facial Surgical Disease (ORPHA17578). These may be associated with clinical 
events rather than the genetic or pathway information that initially generated the clusters of 
rare diseases.
IV. Discussion
This study identified the underlying etiology of rare disease clusters, as enriched by 
Orphanet linearized classifications. By focusing on 18 Orphanet linearized classifications, 
we observed general characteristics of these clusters, such as their reliance on genetic 
information rather than clinical information for classification. Specifically, we identified 
“Rare Developmental Defects During Embryogenesis (ORPHA93890)” and “Rare Inborn 
Errors of Metabolism (ORPHA68367)” as the primary underlying etiologies for these 
clusters.
The Orphanet linearized classification describes rare diseases only limitedly, as it tends 
to select one parent classification from a specific set of entities in the hierarchy and 
focuses primarily on the organ itself [15]. Specifically, developmental anomalies are 
prioritized in linearized categories over diseases affecting the body system. As a result, 
“Rare Developmental Defects During Embryogenesis (ORPHA93890)” includes many rare 
diseases in our study.
Additionally, linearized classification simplifies the representation by reducing complexity. 
When a disease affects only one specific organ, it is classified solely under that organ. 
Consequently, the “Inborn Errors of Metabolism (ORPHA68367)” classification often 
addresses multiple organ issues instead of encompassing all organs, excluding the problem 
that impacts just one organ. In other words, some diseases outside our 10 Clusters, 
which respond solely to one organ, may be relevant to “Inborn Errors of Metabolism 
(ORPHA68367)” but were omitted from our Fig. 1.
We also review the diseases within the clusters aligned with “Rare Developmental Defects 
During Embryogenesis (ORPHA93890)” in Fig. 1, as each disease is linked to a specific 
Orphanet category, identified by its unique ORPHA code. These clusters may be categorized 
depending on the anatomical locations or dysfunction of mechanisms. For example, diseases 
in Clusters 32, 34, and 26 are highly associated with intellectual disabilities; Clusters 21 
and 6 pertain to bone diseases; Cluster 27 relates to skin disorders, and Cluster 26 is 
associated with eye diseases. This indicates that the Orphanet originated the affected systems 
classifications, which can illustrate different body locations based on the cluster despite 
these clusters sharing the exact etiology or underlying mechanism.
We aim to expand our study to explore the specific mechanisms shared within the cluster, 
using the case study of “Rare Inborn Errors of Metabolism (ORPHA68367),” which serves 
as the primary focus of our research.
Acknowledgment
This project was partially supported by the intramural programs (ZIA TR000410-05) at NCATS/NIH. S.M. was 
partially supported by the Office of Data Science Strategy ODSS/NIH.
Moon et al. Page 4
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 5 ---

References
[1]. Klimova B, Storek M, Valis M, Kuca K. Global view on rare diseases: a mini review. Current 
medicinal chemistry. 2017 Sep 1;24(29):3153–8. [PubMed: 28494745] 
[2]. Ferreira CR. The burden of rare diseases. American journal of medical genetics Part A. 2019 
Jun;179(6):885–92. [PubMed: 30883013] 
[3]. Schieppati A, Henter JI, Daina E, Aperia A. Why rare diseases are an important medical and social 
issue. The Lancet. 2008 Jun 14;371(9629):2039–41.
[4]. Boycott KM, Rath A, Chong JX, Hartley T, Alkuraya FS, Baynam G, Brookes AJ, Brudno M, 
Carracedo A, den Dunnen JT, Dyke SO. International cooperation to enable the diagnosis of all 
rare genetic diseases. The American Journal of Human Genetics. 2017 May 4;100(5):695–705. 
[PubMed: 28475856] 
[5]. Pogue RE, Cavalcanti DP, Shanker S, Andrade RV , Aguiar LR, de Carvalho JL, Costa FF. Rare 
genetic diseases: update on diagnosis, treatment and online resources. Drug discovery today. 
2018 Jan 1;23(1):187–95. [PubMed: 29129805] 
[6]. Baldwin Z, Jiao B, Basu A, Roth J, Bender MA, Elsisi Z, Johnson KM, Cousin E, Ramsey 
SD, Devine B. Medical and non-medical costs of sickle cell disease and treatments from a 
US perspective: a systematic review and landscape analysis. PharmacoEconomics-Open. 2022 
Jul;6(4):469–81. [PubMed: 35471578] 
[7]. Zanello G, Garrido-Estepa M, Crespo A, O’Connor D, Nabbout R, Waters C, Hall A, Taglialatela 
M, Chan CH, Pearce DA, Dooms M. Targeting shared molecular etiologies to accelerate drug 
development for rare diseases. EMBO molecular medicine. 2023 Jul 10;15(7):e17159. [PubMed: 
37366158] 
[8]. Sanjak J, Binder J, Yadaw AS, Zhu Q, Mathé EA. Clustering rare diseases within an ontology-
enriched knowledge graph. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 2024 Jan 
1;31(1):154–64.
[9]. Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center. Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://
rarediseases.info.nih.gov.
[10]. Orphanet. Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://www.orpha.net.
[11]. Rath A, Olry A, Dhombres F, Brandt MM, Urbero B, Ayme S. Representation of rare diseases 
in health information systems: the Orphanet approach to serve a wide range of end users. Human 
mutation. 2012 May;33(5):803–8. [PubMed: 22422702] 
[12]. Orphanet Rare Disease ontology (ORDO). Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://
www.orphadata.com/ordo
[13]. Rare diseases and alignment with ICD-10, ICD-11, OMIM, UMLS, MeSH, MedDRA and 
GARD. Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://www.orphadata.com/alignments/
[14]. Linearisation of Rare Diseases. Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://
www.orphadata.com/linearisation/
[15]. Linearization rules for Orphanet classifications. Accessed Oct 15, 2024. Available from: https://
www.orpha.net/pdfs/orphacom/cahiers/docs/GB/Orphanet_linearisation_rules.pdf.
[16]. Fisher RA. Statistical methods for research workers. Oliver and Boyd; 1928.
[17]. Plotly Open Source Graphing Library for Python https://plotly.com/python/
Moon et al. Page 5
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 6 ---

Fig. 1. 
Rare Disease Clusters to the Orphanet Linearization Category
Moon et al. Page 6
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript


--- Page 7 ---

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Moon et al. Page 7
TABLE I.
A Contingency Table for Fisher’s exact test
Orphanet linearized classification j Not in Orphanet linearized classification j
In Cluster i Aa Bb
Not in Cluster i Cc Dd
a.The count of rare diseases in cluster i that are presenting in Orphanet linearized classification j
b.The count of rare diseases in cluster i that are not presenting in Orphanet linearized classification j
c.The count of rare diseases not in cluster i that are presenting in Orphanet linearized classification j
d.The count of rare diseases not in cluster i that are not presenting in Orphanet linearized classification j
Proceedings (IEEE Int Conf Bioinformatics Biomed). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 11.