# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/71/Rath et al. - 2012 - Representation of rare diseases in health information systems The orphanet approach to serve a wide.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

SPECIAL ARTICLE
OFFICIAL JOURNAL
www.hgvs.org
Representation of Rare Diseases in Health Information
Systems: The Orphanet Approach to Serve a Wide Range
of End Users
Ana Rath,1∗ Annie Olry,1 Ferdinand Dhombres,1,2 Maja Mili ˇci ´c Brandt,3 Bruno Urbero,1 and Segolene Ayme1
1Orphanet, Institut National de la Sant ´e et de la Recherche M ´edicale (INSERM), US14, Paris, France; 2Universit ´e Pierre et Marie Curie and
INSERM, U872, ICS, Paris, France; 3National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom
For the Deep Phenotyping Special Issue
Received 7 January 2012; accepted revised manuscript 28 February 2012.
Published online 15 March 2012 in Wiley Online Library (www.wiley.com/humanmutation).DOI: 10.1002/humu.22078
ABSTRACT: Rare disorders are scarcely represented in
international classiﬁcations and therefore invisible in in-
formation systems. One of the major needs in health infor-
mation systems and for research is to share and/or to inte-
grate data coming from heterogeneous sources with diverse
reference terminologies. ORPHANET (www.orpha.net)
is a multilingual information portal on rare diseases and
orphan drugs. Orphanet information system is supported
by a relational database built around the concept of rare
disorders. Representation of rare diseases in Orphanet
encompasses levels of increasing complexity: lexical
(multilingual terminology), nosological (multihierarchical
classiﬁcations), relational (annotations—epidemiological
data—and classes of objects—genes, manifestations, and
orphan drugs—integrated in a relational database), and
interoperational (semantic interoperability). Rare disor-
ders are mapped to International Classiﬁcation of Dis-
eases (10th version), SNOMED CT, MeSH, MedDRA,
and UMLS. Genes are cross-referenced with HGNC,
UniProt, OMIM, and Genatlas. A suite of tools allow for
extraction of massive datasets giving different views that
can be used in bioinformatics to answer complex ques-
tions, intended to serve the needs of researchers and the
pharmaceutical industry in developing medicinal products
for rare diseases. An ontology is under development. The
Orphanet nomenclature is at the crossroads of scientiﬁc
data repositories and of clinical terminology standards, and
is suitable to be used as a standard terminology.
Hum Mutat 33:803–808, 2012. C⃝ 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
KEY WORDS: rare diseases; nosology; classiﬁcation; ontol-
ogy; interoperability; relational database
∗Correspondence to: Ana Rath, Orphanet, Institut National de la Sant ´ee td e
la Recherche M ´edicale, US14, 96 rue Didot, 75014 Paris, France. E-mail: ana.rath@
inserm.fr
Contract grant sponsor: European Commission, Directorate G´en ´erale in Grants Health
and Consumers (grant agreement RDPortal, JA RDTF): INSERM and the “Direction
Generale de la Sante” in France; and GlaxoSmithKline.
Introduction
Rare disorders are deﬁned in Europe as those with a prevalence
lower than 5 in 10,000 people. According to the deﬁnition adopted in
the Orphanet database (see below), there are around 6,000 rare dis-
orders, including diseases, syndromes, and anomalies. Most of them
are genetic in origin and almost all Mendelian disorders are rare.
Because of their rarity, these disorders are scarcely represented in
international classiﬁcations and therefore invisible in health infor-
mation systems, contributing to their invisibility in society at large.
For instance, hospital information systems in many countries use
the WHO’s International Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD) in its 10th
version, or even in the 9th version, to record patient information.
Only around 500 rare diseases are listed in the ICD-10, and only half
of these have their own speciﬁc code. As a result, clinical research on
these disorders requires speciﬁc sources of information (disease reg-
isters) for epidemiological and research purposes, which are costly
to set up and to maintain. The lack of speciﬁc codes for rare disor-
ders in international classiﬁcation systems is especially regrettable
in light of the avalanche of new data generated by next-generation
sequencing, likely to ﬁrst beneﬁt rare diseases [Lindblom and Robin-
son, 2011]. This lack of codes is also particularly unfortunate now
that technology allows for the integration of multiple sources of
information, including electronic health records, but also gene and
protein databases in many species, genetic variations in humans
and animal models [W ebb et al., 2011], and medicinal chemistry
databases such as PubChem, DrugBank, ChemBank IUPHAR, and
ChEMBdb [Blomberg et al., 2011]. The availability of open-access
clinical databases in the ﬁeld of rare diseases is likely to boost re-
search, especially given that rare diseases are disease models that
help to understand the physiopathology of diseases for the direct
beneﬁt of all patients. Currently, therapies developed for rare dis-
eases represent a signiﬁcant part of all innovations in the therapeutic
ﬁeld. In the United States in ﬁscal year 2011, 30% of the 35 inno-
vative treatments approved have orphan indications (http://www.
fda . gov / downloads / AboutFDA / ReportsManualsForms / Reports /
UCM278358.). The aim of this article is to give an overview on how
rare diseases are represented in Orphanet, as well as the reasons for
knowledge representation.
The Orphanet Approach to Representing
Knowledge on Rare Diseases to Serve End Users
Besides its mission of producing and disseminating information
on rare disorders, Orphanet has built a representation of knowl-
edge on rare disorders, which is constantly evolving in order to
C⃝ 2012 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.


--- Page 2 ---

better serve its diverse population of users. This representation
can be analyzed in its levels of increasing complexity: lexical (ter-
minology), nosological (classiﬁcation), relational (annotations and
classes of objects integrated in a relational database), and interop-
erational (semantic interoperability). According to the users’ needs,
data on rare disorders can be obtained at each one of these levels to
be used for different purposes, either from the Orphanet W ebsite
(www.orpha.net), which is continuously updated, or from a dedi-
cated download platform, OrphaData (www.orphadata.org), which
is monthly updated. An ontology of rare diseases, OntoOrpha, is
under development as well.
Inventory and Terminology of Rare Diseases
An inventory of rare disorders has been maintained since 1997 in
order to provide an exhaustive list of terms designating rare diseases,
rare syndromes, rare morphological or biological anomalies, and
particular clinical situations considered as rare conditions. In the
Orphanet inventory, a disorder is deﬁned as a clinically unique,
distinct entity, whatever the number and nature of the causes (i.e.,
number of causative genes, different modes of inheritance, etc.).
The choice of clinical criteria to deﬁne what a rare disorder is was
driven by the original aim of Orphanet, that is, to guide physicians
and patients dealing with rare diseases to the appropriate source of
information for them.
This inventory is updated monthly in order to: (1) include newly
described disorders; (2) follow the evolution of knowledge, that
is, grouping separate entities that are now known to be a unique
entity or, on the contrary, separating different forms of a previously
unique disorder that have proven to be distinct entities; (3) update
the preferred terms used to designate disorders; and (4) expand
synonymy.
More precisely, when a disorder is recognized to have been sepa-
rated into subforms, the latter are created while the parent disorder
is kept (and hierarchically related to its subforms, see below). Dele-
tions in the inventory of rare disorders are limited to duplicate
entries in the database, and traceability of decisions is assured in the
back ofﬁce.
Each rare disorder has a unique identiﬁer, called the ORPHA
number, which is stable over time. This unique identiﬁer makes it
p o s s i b l et oa l w a y sr e f e rt ot h es a m ee n t i t y ,e v e ni fi t sp r e f e r r e dn a m e
has changed over time.
The inventory of rare diseases can be used in medical information
systems (i.e., hospital information systems) to code patients’ records,
thus allowing identiﬁcation of those presenting with a rare disorder.
Classiﬁcations of Rare Disorders
I no r d e rt om o v eo nt oan o s o l o g i c a ll e v e lo fr e p r e s e n t a t i o no f
rare disorders, groups of disorders, as well as subtypes, were added
to the Orphanet terminology, and further organized into classiﬁca-
tions. Classiﬁcations accept an unrestricted number of granularity
levels, and a clinical entity can be subdivided into several clinical
and/or etiological subtypes. It allows, among other things, to map
to any other resource in a one-to-one manner: entries in genetic-
based databases (e.g., OMIM) map to deeper levels in the hierar-
chy (genetic subtypes), whereas clinical-based ones (e.g., ICD) will
map to higher levels in the hierarchy. As an example, Silver–Russell
syndrome (a clinical entity) encompasses the following etiological
subtypes:
Silver–Russell syndrome
Silver–Russell syndrome due to 11p15 microduplication
Silver–Russell syndrome due to 7p11.2p13 microduplication
Silver–Russell syndrome due to imprinting defect of 11p15
Silver–Russell syndrome due to maternal uniparental disomy of
chromosome 11
Silver–Russell syndrome due to maternal uniparental disomy of
chromosome 7
Like disorders, groups of disorders, categories, and sub-types also
have unique ORPHA numbers.
Classiﬁcations are produced and updated from different sources:
(1) medical and scientiﬁc publications; (2) workshops with experts
groups; (3) expert validation for restricted groups of disorders; and
(4) international collaborative efforts such as the revision of the
ICD.
The Orphanet classiﬁcation of rare diseases has adopted a clinical
approach to classiﬁcation, with the aim of following the organi-
zation of medical specialties that r oughly follow organization into
body systems. Deeper in the different sections of the Orphanet clas-
siﬁcation of rare diseases, other criteria are followed, according to
the intrinsic logic of the medical management in a given specialty.
For instance, in the neuromuscular section of neurological diseases,
a histopathological approach is further adopted for muscular dis-
eases, distinguishing myopathies from dystrophies, as muscle biopsy
is a ﬁrst step in the diagnostic workup. Etiopathological classiﬁca-
tions of particular groups of diseases are also produced, in order
to have disorders classiﬁed by mechanisms or causative genes for
instance.
The Orphanet classiﬁcation is multihierarchical; each entry is
classiﬁed in one or more classiﬁcations and in one or more sections
of a single classiﬁcation (multiple parentage). For example, Bardet–
Biedl syndrome is classiﬁed as a developmental anomaly syndrome
and as an endocrine disease, and, among endocrine diseases, as a
genetic form of obesity and as a syndrome with hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. Furthermore, Bardet–Biedl syndrome is classiﬁed
as a ciliopathy, and its siblings in this mechanistic classiﬁcation are
totally different than those in the clinical classiﬁcations (T able 1).
Relational Database of Rare Disorders
Rare disorder inventories and classiﬁcations are the core of a rich,
complex relational database, encompassing other classes of entities,
namely, a nomenclature of genes involved in rare disorders, a the-
saurus of clinical manifestations, an inventory of pharmacological
compounds (orphan drugs and orphan designations), and a direc-
tory of medical services (expert centers and diagnostic tests), patient
organizations, and research activities (research projects, clinical tri-
als, patients registries, mutation registries, and biobanks).
Furthermore, each rare disorder is annotated with its epidemi-
ological data (prevalence, age of onset, and age of death) and its
mode of inheritance for inheritable diseases. Each disorder is linked
to one or more texts produced by Orphanet (expert-reviewed ab-
stracts, emergency guidelines, and lay people encyclopedia), or by
others (review articles, clinical practice guidelines, gene cards, prac-
tical genetics articles, etc.)
This relational database is constantly evolving to better repre-
sent knowledge. Ongoing changes include qualifying gene-disorder
relationships (i.e., causality, susceptibility, and major role in phe-
notype). Disorders are qualiﬁed as diseases, syndromes, anomalies,
particular clinical situations, groups of disorders, etiological sub-
types, clinical subtypes, and histological subtypes.
Interoperability and Cross-Referencing
One of the major needs in health information systems and for
research is to be able to share and/or to integrate data coming
804 HUMAN MUTATION, V ol. 33, No. 5, 803–808, 2012


--- Page 3 ---

Table 1. Comparison Between Siblings of Bardet–Biedl Syndrome Depending on the Classiﬁcation Criteria ∗
Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy Syndromic retinitis pigmentosa Genetic syndromic obesity
Bardet–Biedl syndrome Bardet–Biedl syndrome Bardet–Biedl syndrome
Alstr¨om syndrome Alstr ¨om syndrome Alstr ¨om syndrome
Ellis–van Creveld syndrome Cohen syndrome Cohen syndrome
Jeune syndrome Usher syndrome Prader–Willi syndrome
Joubert syndrome Joubert syndrome with ocular defect Borjesson–Forssman–Lehma syndrome
Joubert syndrome with oculorenal defect Joubert syndrome with oculorenal defect MEHMO syndrome
AR nephronophthisis Cockayne syndrome MOMO syndrome
Senior–Loken syndrome Kearns–Sayre syndrome Maternal UDP14
∗These lists are not exhaustive.
from heterogeneous sources with diverse reference terminologies.
This requires mapping between the terminologies in use in order
to allow syntactic and semantic interoperability, that is, being able
to achieve translation from one terminology into another, and to
share a common conceptual context. The mapping process also
allows terminology curation because the mapping itself, and its
evaluation, may reveal inaccuracies in both the source and target
terminologies, such as wrong synonyms, redundancies, or errors in
concept hierarchies.
Orphanet undertook collaboration with the National Genetic
Reference Laboratories (Manchester, UK) [Mili ˇci´cB r a n d te ta l . ,
2011] in order to map the Orphanet nomenclature of rare diseases
with UMLS, SNOMED CT, MeSH, and MedDRA. Automated map-
pings are reviewed by independent reviewers, and they are qualiﬁed
as “exact, ” “narrower term–broader term, ” “broader term–narrower
term, ” or “inexact. ” All but inexact mappings will be displayed on
the Orphanet W ebsite in the near future, giving access to the target
terminologies, and will be updated and checked once a year. Mas-
sive extraction of mappings via the OrphaData platform will be also
available.
The Orphanet nomenclature is already mapped to the ICD-10
terms, although these mappings are not qualiﬁed. Orphanet is rep-
resented in the rare diseases T opic Advisory Group (RD-TAG) work-
ing on the revision of the ICD to produce its 11th version (ICD-11).
Integration of rare diseases in the ICD-11 will allow one-to-one
mapping between an ORPHA code and an ICD-11 concept, which
is expected to signiﬁcantly increase the visibility of rare diseases in
medical information systems. The Orphanet nomenclature is also
cross-referenced with OMIM.
The Genes nomenclature is also cross-matched with external
knowledge databases such as HGNC, UniProt, Genatlas, and OMIM.
These mappings allow for interfacing with additional scientiﬁc re-
sources, which use one or more of these nomenclatures. T o achieve
this, partnerships are being established with several EBI resources
(Reactome, Ensembl, for instance), IUPHAR, and further collabo-
rations are expected, allowing interconnections between heteroge-
neous but complementary resources around rare diseases.
The Reasons for Moving from an Inventory of
Rare Diseases to a Multihierarchical,
Interoperable, Classiﬁcation System, and to an
Ontology of Rare Diseases
ORPHANET (www.orpha.net) is an information portal on rare
diseases and orphan drugs jointly established in 1997 by the Insti-
tut National de la Sant ´e et de la Recherche M ´edicale (INSERM; the
French National Institute of Health and Medical Research) and the
French General Directorate for Health in order to provide healthcare
professionals and the general public with valuable information that
can be used to improve diagnosis and care. In this respect, a multi-
lingual information portal was created, composed of an inventory of
rare diseases and an online free-access encyclopedia as well as a direc-
tory of expert clinics, medical laboratories, research projects, clinical
trials, registries, biobanks, drugs in development and on the market,
and patient organizations [Ayme et al., 1998]. It became a European
project in 2000 with funding from the European Commission (EU).
It is now an EU Joint Action with a network of almost 40 countries
contributing to the collection of data and to the translations. It is un-
der the responsibility of the INSERM, which has a speciﬁc unit fully
dedicated to information and services in the ﬁeld of rare diseases and
orphan drugs. In 2010, on average, 10,000 visitors were registered
per day with 1/3 of them being doctors, 1/5 other healthcare profes-
sionals, and 1/3 patients, viewing over 1,000,000 pages per month.
Researchers (8%), pharmaceutical industry (6%), and health pol-
icy makers (1%) are the other categories of users (http://www
.orpha.net/orphacom/cahiers/docs/GB/ActivityReport2010.pdf).
The Orphanet information system is supported by a relational
database built around the concept of distinct clinical entity that we
call a disorder in this article. Every piece of information is linked to
a disorder or a group of disorders (Fig. 1).
From 1997 to 2007, the inventory of rare diseases was a ﬂat list,
each piece of information being linked to the ad hoc list of dis-
eases. This was not a problem for the information on pharmaceu-
tical products, which are always developed for one single disease
or a very limited number of diseases, but became a problem when
linking expert clinics to speciﬁc diseases. Some clinics were highly
specialized, such as expert centers for cystic ﬁbrosis or for Gaucher
disease, whereas others, equally relevant, covered a larger group,
such as rare pulmonary diseases in childhood (which includes cystic
ﬁbrosis) or clinics for lysosomal storage diseases (which includes
Gaucher disease). The problem did not concern linking the expert
resources appropriately, but rather enabling W ebsite users to retrieve
the appropriate information. Those querying for “lysosomal storage
disease” would not ﬁnd the Gaucher clinics. This was also a prob-
lem for the encyclopedia as some review articles covered a group of
diseases while others dealt with a speciﬁc disease. It became evident
that a hierarchical representation of rare diseases was necessary to
better serve end users by allowing them to query at any level, from
very speciﬁc subtypes to large entities and still have an answer.
However, the population of users of the W ebsite was heterogeneous,
including experts, nonexpert health professionals, patients, fami-
lies, researchers, healthcare managers, and bioinformaticians. Their
representation of the ﬁeld differed, as well as their expectations
and needs. W e started by collecting classiﬁcations published in text
books and peer-reviewed articles, and adapted these classiﬁcations
to our own identiﬁed needs. W e needed a classiﬁcation of diseases
reﬂecting clinical pathways, and for it to be suitable for retrieving
HUMAN MUTATION, V ol. 33, No. 5, 803–808, 2012 805


--- Page 4 ---

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the Orphanet relational database centered on disorders.
information on expert clinics. This was a relatively easy exercise for
diseases in which the phenotype corresponds to a single medical
specialty, that is, 3,231 of the 5,954 diseases in Orphanet, although
their position in the internal hierarchy could also be difﬁcult. The
question of differentiating between diseases expressed in childhood
to those expressed in adulthood had to be considered as most expert
clinics either see exclusively children or adults. For the rest of the
2,723 diseases, it was impossible to assign them to a clear medi-
cal specialty as the phenotype included manifestations managed by
different specialists. It was necessary to determine which specialty
clinics were the main entry point for these phenotypes, and which
ones were secondary. This resulted in the establishment of a multi-
hierarchical ad hoc classiﬁcation. The same approach was taken to
build another hierarchy for the research activities. A logic based on
mechanisms and etiologies was used to build up new classiﬁcations.
This multihierarchical, multipurpose classiﬁcation system was the
basis of the fourth version of Orphanet released in 2008.
After the launch of this new version, Orphanet started to receive
requests from researchers, both from the academic and from the in-
dustry sector, who were interested in making use of our dataset. The
dialogue with them, and the comments received from W ebsite users
through our annual user satisfaction survey, led to a shift in our ap-
proach toward a representation of the knowledge for bioinformatics
and the semantic W eb. It prompted us to increase mapping between
the Orphanet nomenclature of rare disorders, including the inven-
tory of genes involved in rare disorders, and other resources (i.e.,
medical terminologies and scientiﬁc databases). Interoperability of
the Orphanet nomenclature of rare disorders with other biomed-
ical terminologies together with the cross-referencing of the genes
nomenclature with external databases contributed to the creation of
a crossroads system between knowledge databases/ontologies using
different terminologies and having very different perspectives (genes
annotation, proteins annotation, fundamental pharmacology, phys-
iological pathways, etc.). It was intended to provide researchers with
access to integrated resources of interest in the ﬁeld of rare diseases.
One of the use cases of the Orphanet database is that of the
inventory and classiﬁcations of rare diseases that can be used in
medical information systems (i.e., hospital information systems) to
code patients’ health records, thus allowing for the identiﬁcation
of those presenting with a rare disorder. As an example, it has been
used since 2006 in France by CEMARA, a clinical database collecting
patient information from 55 French centers of expertise (and their
network) on rare diseases [Messiaen et al., 2008; Landais et al.,
2010]. They allow for retrieval of information by group of diseases
or by medical domain. They also allow for coding of patients with a
category code when there is no speciﬁc diagnosis given as yet.
A suite of tools was developed in order to allow extraction of mas-
sive datasets giving a view of the relational database. These views can
806 HUMAN MUTATION, V ol. 33, No. 5, 803–808, 2012


--- Page 5 ---

be used by bioinformaticians to answer complex questions, such as
what is the distribution of fundamental research by medical domain
or by disease, how is funding for research distributed by disease, what
is the landscape of centers of expertise in Europe, and so on. Some of
these views are freely available at OrphaData (www.orphadata.org),
which was launched in June 2011 and some are available on request,
after signature of a material transfer agreement. Massive extraction
of mapping between the Orphanet inventory of rare disorders and
genes and other external resources will also be available in 2012 via
the OrphaData platform. OrphaData is intended to better serve the
needs of health information systems, those of researchers, as well
as those of the pharmaceutical industry in developing medicinal
products for patients with rare diseases.
Evolution to a Real “Ontology of Rare Diseases”
The growing complexity of the Orphanet knowledge base, in
terms of maintenance and quality control, as well as in terms of
representation and interoperability (see above), called for the con-
struction of an ontology of rare disorders. The aims of building
up the Orphanet ontology of rare diseases (OntoOrpha), besides
the relational database and connecting to it, is to allow for appro-
priate knowledge management (edition, curation, validation, and
quality control) in a simpler and more accurate manner. This on-
tology also aims to facilitate semantic interoperability with other
ontologies, terminologies, and databases, and to provide decision
support [Bodenreider, 2008]. Ontology-based automated reasoning
ensures consistency across the knowledge model (compliance with
the logical rules underlying the knowledge model) and allows new
meaningful relationship generation (or to express implicit relation-
ships between classes of objects in the ontology [Dhombres et al.,
2011]. This is possible because the ontology offers a formalization of
the domain semantics (including concepts of classiﬁcation, group
of disorders, disorder, malformation syndrome, clinical subtype,
etiological subtype, gene, manifestations, and many others, and
including relationships between these concepts: “manifestation of, ”
“frequent manifestation of, ” “gene of, ” “causal gene of, ” etc.) that can
be interpreted by computers. Each concept (disorders and genes) of
OntoOrpha is annotated with external references and codes: ICD-
10, HGNC, UniProt, OMIM, and Genatlas. In 2012, new references
will be added: SNOMED CT, MeSH, MedDRA, and UMLS.
The Orphanet ontology of rare diseases is currently
under construction by a multidisciplinary team includ-
ing domain experts (MDs and biologists), information sci-
entists, computer scientists, and knowledge engineers. A
beta-version of OntoOrpha has been released in BioPortal
(www.bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/1586) and is freely ac-
cessible. It enables users to follow the development of the under-
construction ontology of rare diseases, but it does not, for the mo-
ment, provide access to the whole Orphanet database content.
Discussion
Representing knowledge on diseases to serve different categories
of users (e.g., physicians, researchers, and decision makers) is chal-
lenging because each particular use corresponds to a particular se-
mantic view, including a particular deﬁnition of a disease. There are
in fact multiple ways to deﬁne what a disease or a disorder is. What we
call a “disorder” is a representation of a pathological process or state
according to a point of view adopted in a particular context (universe
of knowledge) and with a particular aim. A “disorder” encompasses
multiple dimensions that can be classiﬁed, among others, in clin-
Table 2. Examples of Different Deﬁnitions of a Same Entity
According to Its Different Dimensions: Congenital Adrenal
Hyperplasia
Pathophysiology Group of genetic conditions due to an anomaly in the
biosynthesis of adrenal hormones, which can be either
complete (classic form) or incomplete (atypical forms).
Etiology Refers to any of several autosomal recessive diseases resulting
from mutations of genes coding for enzymes, mediating
the biochemical steps of production of cortisol from
cholesterol by the adrenal gland (steroidogenesis).
Diagnosis (hormonal
proﬁle)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a rare disorder
characterized by cortisol deﬁciency, with/without
aldosterone deﬁciency, and androgen excess.
Clinical
manifestations
Also called adrenogenital syndrome, it is a cause of sexual
ambiguity at birth in its classic form, and of female
virilization, precocious puberty, and hypofertility in its
atypical forms.
Prognosis Adrenal glands anomaly that, if untreated, lead to growth
and pubertal impairment, and to a risk of potential
life-threatening dehydration.
Management Adrenal diseases requiring life-long hormone replacement
therapy.
Epidemiology Adrenal disease that is rare in Europe in its classic form, and
a frequent disease in its atypical forms in some identiﬁed
populations (Ashkenazi Jews, Italian, and Spanish
populations).
Public health A congenital disorder deserving newborn screening.
ical, etiological, physiopathological (mechanistic), and therapeutic
and many others, each one of these categories encompassing further
dimensions (T able 2). For example, from a clinical point of view, X-
linked adrenoleukodystrophy can be deﬁned either as a neurological
disease or an endocrinological disease, and further, as a dementia or
as an adrenal insufﬁciency or a cause of male infertility ... depend-
ing on the point of view chosen (i.e., by an endocrinologist or by a
neurologist). W e can also look deeper into this entity to isolate, in
the spectrum of its clinical manifestations, clinically relevant sub-
forms (i.e., juvenile X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and the adult
form adrenomyeloneuropathy). These subforms can be considered
as diseases per se, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy not longer being
a unique entity, that is, the “disorder” level, but a group of two
distinct disorders.
A clinical entity can also be considered from an etiological point
of view, such as different pathogenic agents or strains of a bacterium
causing more or less the same disease, or different mutated genes
resulting in a single phenotype. For the geneticist and for diagnostic
purposes, each one of the genetic alterations underlying a disorder
can be considered as an entity (e.g., CLN-10 is different from CLN-
6, even though they both cause the late infantile form of ceroid
lipofuscinosis).
In other words, depending on the context and on our interest,
we will isolate an entity from a double continuum: a phenomic
continuum of growing comprehensiveness, from the clinical mani-
festations to the category of disorders; and a nosological continuum,
from the genetic mutation to the group of disorders encompassing
this kind of abnormality. For example, in the phenomic continuum
ranging from shortness of breath and cyanosis to interstitial lung dis-
ease, and passing through restrictive pneumopathy and idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis, we can adopt a physiopathological point of view
and consider that “our” disease level is “restrictive pneumopathy, ”
which makes sense in a diagnostic and therapeutic perspective. In
the nosological continuum, going from anomalies of CYP21A2 to
sterol-dependent hormone synthesis deﬁciency, we can focus our
interest on a particular mutation that will be at the right level of
granularity we are dealing with.
HUMAN MUTATION, V ol. 33, No. 5, 803–808, 2012 807


--- Page 6 ---

The challenge in the representation of knowledge is to build up
a hierarchical and relational system that can be used by different
categories of users at different levels of granularity, and to make
this system able to handle connections with others, allowing for
crossroads between complementary sources of knowledge. In the
Orphanet relational database, four main classes of objects are in-
terconnected: disorders (organized in a multihierarchical, multidi-
mensional classiﬁcation), genes, clinical manifestations, and orphan
drugs. Each one of these classes has relationships with external re-
sources (databases, terminologies, and ontologies) or in-house re-
sources (inventory of clinical trials and PubMed queries, among
others).
The Orphanet nomenclature is a new standard terminology to be
incorporated into the UMLS, as it is complementary to the other
existing ones, serving different purposes. The closest terminology
is the OMIM one [Amberger et al., 2011], which pursues the task
of cataloging the association between human phenotypes and their
causatives genes. The excellent cross-referencing of OMIM with
other genomics databases makes it the number one source for this
type of information. This is why Orphanet keeps track of OMIM de-
velopment and interfaces its inventory of rare diseases with OMIM.
The feature that differentiates Orphanet from OMIM is the pro-
posed multihierarchical classiﬁcation, which allows, for instance, all
associated genes to be linked to a group of diseases. In addition,
Orphanet contains rare diseases with no known genetic basis.
SNOMED CT is a sophisticated biomedical vocabulary to be
used in electronic health records currently underrepresenting rare
diseases. The cross-referencing of Orphanet and SNOMED CT pro-
vides the opportunity to inform SNOMED of the missing terms,
contributing to better adaptation of this vocabulary to the needs of
the healthcare professionals using it.
MeSH is a National Library of Medicine (NLM) medical ter-
minology intended to index the medical literature. As a conse-
quence of the alignment between the Orphanet nomenclature of
rare disorders and the MeSH, new speciﬁc PubMed queries will
be available in Orphanet, the number of mappings between Or-
phanet and MeSH having increased because of the incorporation
into the MeSH of many rare diseases listed by the NIH Ofﬁce of
Rare Diseases Research. Feedback to the NLM could be also pro-
vided in order to improve the representation of rare diseases into the
MeSH.
The ICD is the international standard diagnostic classiﬁcation
used for epidemiological studies, healthcare management purposes,
and clinical use. It also provides the basis for the compilation of na-
tional mortality and morbidity statistics by WHO Member States.
The last edition, ICD-10, was adopted in 1990 and is currently under
revision for adoption in 2014, by a very large group of stakeholders.
The process is organized through TAGs, which organize the con-
sultation of experts and drafting of the alpha version, revising the
structure and adding the clinical entities that have emerged since
1990. The establishment of a RD-TAG demonstrates the willing-
ness of WHO to incorporate rare diseases in the next edition, using
the Orphanet terminology and clinical classiﬁcation system as a
template. Although ICD intends to offer a multihierarchical classi-
ﬁcation of the diseases in its next electronic edition, it is likely that
it will be limited to views useful to record mortality and morbidity
with a clear public health perspective. Views intended to serve highly
specialized care and research are less likely to be taken into account.
Therefore, the Orphanet nomenclature will be aligned with the next
edition of ICD from now on, easing the process of migration from
ICD-10 to ICD-11 for data related to rare diseases if coded with
the Orphanet nomenclature. In addition, Orphanet will offer other
classiﬁcations directed more toward research and specialized care.
The Orphanet nomenclature is positioned at the crossroads of
scientiﬁc data repositories and of clinical terminology standards in
order to form a bridge between these two worlds and contribute to
translational medicine. It is a very dynamic project that is constantly
adapting to the needs of its end users, but is sufﬁciently stable to be
used as a standard terminology.
References
Amberger J, Bocchini C, Hamosh A. 2011. A new face and new challenges for online
Mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM). Hum Mutat 32:564–567.
Ayme S, Urbero B, Oziel D, Lecouturier E, Biscarat A. 1998. Information on rare
diseases: the Orphanet project. Rev Med Interne 19:376–377.
Blomberg N, Ecker G, Kidd R, Mons B, Williams-Jones B. 2011. Knowledge driven
discovery goes semantic. Eur Fed Med Chem Y earbook 39–43.
Bodenreider O. 2008. Biomedical ontologies in action: role in knowledge management,
data integration and decision support. Y earb Med Inform 67–79.
Dhombres F, V andenbussche P-Y, Rath A, Olry A, Hanauer M, Urbero B, Charlet J. 2011.
OntoOrpha : an ontology to support edition and audit of rare diseases knowledge
in Orphanet. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Biomedical On-
tology (ICBO-2011). Buffalo, NY , USA: Olivier Bodenreider, Maryann E. Martone,
Alan Ruttenberg (eds.); pp. 241–243.
Landais P, Messiaen C, Rath A, Le Mignot L, Dufour E, Ben Said M, Jais JP, T oubiana
L, Baujat G, Bourdon-Lanoy E, Gerard-Blanluet M, Bodemer C, and others. 2010.
CEMARA task force. CEMARA an information system for rare diseases. Stud
Health T echnol Inform 160:481–485.
Lindblom A, Robinson PN. 2011. Bioinformatics for human genetics: promises and
challenges. Hum Mutat 32:495–500.
Messiaen C, Le Mignot L, Rath A, Richard JB, Dufour E, Ben Said M, Jais JP, V erloes A, Le
Merrer M, Bodemer C, Baujat G, Gerard-Blanluet M, and others. 2008. CEMARA:
a W eb dynamic application within a N-tier architecture for rare diseases. Stud
Health T echnol Inform 136:51–56.
Miliˇci´c Brandt M, Rath A, Devereau A, Ayme S. 2011. Mapping Orphanet terminology
to UMLS. In: Proceedings of the 13th Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in
Medicine. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-V erlag; pp. 194–203.
W ebb AJ, Thorisson GA, Brookes AJ; GEN2PHEN Consortium. 2011. An informat-
ics project and online “Knowledge Centre” supporting modern genotype-to-
phenotype research. Hum Mutat 32:543–550.
808 HUMAN MUTATION, V ol. 33, No. 5, 803–808, 2012