# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/77/Vockley - 2025 - mRNA therapy as primary and bridge therapy for inborn errors of metabolism.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

Commentary
mRNA therapy as primary and
bridge therapy for inborn errors
of metabolism
Jerry Vockley1
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2025.02.010
Development of therapies for rare disease in-
volves a cascade ofin vitro testing, often start-
ing with structural modeling then moving to
cell studies, followed by conﬁrmation ofin vivo
efﬁcacy in animal models before ﬁrst-in-hu-
man studies can occur.
1 In the case of inborn
errors of metabolism, correction of the under-
lying enzymatic defect is a critical biomarker
for the preclinical studies, but one that is often
stymied by lack of an appropriate model. In
this setting, naturally occurring large animal
models exist for a limited number of enzyme
deﬁciencies, but engineered mouse models
are far more commonly used for proof-of-
concept studies. However, even mouse models
can be challenging, as they sometimes do not
reﬂect the full human phenotype or are so se-
vere that the defect is either lethal in utero or
deﬁcient animals do not survive long enough
post-delivery to be studied. Such has been
the case for the X-linked disorder ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) de ﬁciency. In its
most severe form, it presents with over-
whelming hyperammonemia with high
morbidity and mortality.
2 Milder patients,
especially females, can have later-onset disease
with less dramatic episodes of hyperammone-
mia but still with signi ﬁcant neurologic and
intellectual impairment.
Animal models for this condition have been
either too mild to accurately re ﬂect severe
neonatal disease (the most pressing need
for acute therapy), or too severe to serve as
an in vivo model due to early death.
3 Thus,
the OTC model described by Zhou et al. in
this issue of Molecular Therapy represents
an important advance in the ﬁeld.
4 Their
inducible model of OTC de ﬁciency leads to
severe de ﬁciency and is amenable for the
study of new therapies, in this case lipid
nanoparticle encapsulated OTC mRNA.
The model was generated using cre/lox
gene editing technology to delete exon 2 of
the OTC gene using a tamoxifen inducible
promotor to achieve ef ﬁcient knockout of
OTC expression in adult animals. The ani-
mals survive and develop hyperammonemia
with impaired ureagenesis, chronic symp-
toms including poor growth, and character-
istic pathologic changes on a normal protein
diet. Treatment with liver-directed OTC
mRNA delivered via nanoparticles was
remarkably effective both acutely and with
long-term treatment in controlling hyper-
ammonemia and its symptoms. It also
reduced accumulation of orotic acid and
glutamine, standard clinical biomarkers of
the disease. Given the relative effectiveness
of the therapy, the apparent safety of other
lipid nanoparticle therapies in early clinical
trials for inborn errors of metabolism,
and a successful phase 1 study of another
OTC mRNA therapy in adult patients with
OTC de ﬁciency ( clinicaltrials.gov study
NCT06488313), it seems that this therapy
is ready to transition to ﬁrst-in-human clin-
ical trials.
Development of a potential mRNA therapy
for OTC de ﬁciency raises the question of
its relative role in treatment vs. other thera-
pies for this condition ( Figure 1). Phenylace-
tate and/or its prodrug phenylbutyrate have
been used for over 40 years as an alternative
ammonia conjugating agent in the treatment
of OTC deﬁciency, but as babies reach 1 year
of age or 10 kg in weight, the drug cannot
keep up with the body ’s need for ammonia
removal and mortality rises.
5 Thus, most
severely affected infants receive a liver trans-
plant in the ﬁrst year of life, trading OTC
deﬁciency for a different set of medical prob-
lems related to chronic immunosuppres-
sion.
6 Liver-directed gene therapy for OTC
is currently in clinical trials, but has
only been used in adolescents or adults
(clinicaltrials.gov study NCT05345171). A
second study focused on neonatal OTC is
now enrolling ( clinicaltrials.gov study
NCT06255782). However, a number of con-
cerns about the use of gene therapy in young
infants and children have limited its develop-
ment for this population, including long-
term safety, durability of effect, and off-
target effects. Here, a role for mRNA as a
transition therapy for OTC seems logical,
with use for a year or 2 to bridge severe pa-
tients to liver transplant or gene therapy.
Of course, long-term therapy with mRNA
is potentially feasible but depends on the in-
terval needed between infusions to maintain
clinical ef ﬁcacy. It is important to note that
while most mRNA therapies currently in
clinical trials are liver targeted, effects
beyond liver symptoms have been reported.
Mice with de ﬁciencies propionyl-CoA
carboxylase (the cause of propionic acide-
mia) and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (lead-
ing to primary methylmalonic acidemia)
have shown signi ﬁcant systemic improve-
ments with liver-based mRNA therapies, as
have patients with propionic acidemia in
early-phase clinical trials.
7,8 Similarly, treat-
ment of very long and medium-chain acyl-
CoA dehydrogenase- (VLCAD and MCAD,
respectively) deﬁcient mice with lipid nano-
particle encapsulated mRNA provides recov-
ery of cold tolerance typical of wild-type an-
imals, a phenotype associated with brown fat
in mice and muscle in humans.
9,10 Thus, it is
important to remember that liver-based
mRNA therapy can have broader physiologic
effects, potentially expanding the scope of
diseases it can treat.
As mRNA therapies in preclinical develop-
ment expand, it is appropriate to consider
their path to approval by the Food and
1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic and
Genomic Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Schools
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Correspondence: Jerry Vockley, Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Genetic and Genomic
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Schools of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
E-mail: gerard.vockley@chp.edu
842 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 ª 2025 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


--- Page 2 ---

Drug Administration (FDA) as medications
for human use. Overall, the FDA ’s current
legislative mandates and regulations for
drug development in rare diseases are
focused on incentivizing research, expediting
approval processes, and ensuring that patient
perspectives are integral to the development
of new therapies.
11 These efforts re ﬂect a
growing recognition of the unique challenges
faced by individuals with rare diseases and a
commitment to improving access to treat-
ment. The FDA Rare Diseases Program is de-
signed to streamline the approval process for
drugs targeting rare conditions. This pro-
gram encourages the submission of investi-
gational new drug applications (INDs) and
provides guidance on expedited review pro-
cesses, including Fast Track designation,
Breakthrough Therapy designation, and
Accelerated Approval pathways. These ini-
tiatives aim to reduce the time it takes for pa-
tients to access new therapies. In the tradi-
tional regulatory environment, each mRNA
preparation would be considered a new
drug and require a full development path
for approval including all toxicity and safety
testing. However, there is signiﬁcant merit to
considering such drugs as a platform where
the safety is accepted as proven for any
mRNA package so long as the capsid for
deliver is identical. While each mRNA drug
still would need to prove ef ﬁcacy for the dis-
ease in question, the time and expense to
ﬁnal FDA approval would be reduced sub-
stantially. Such a change would require
explicit action by the FDA and represent a
new paradigm in drug development. Based
on its rare disease model, It is likely that
the agency indeed has the authority to reach
a decision to enable this approach, but it has
not yet demonstrated the willingness to do
so. If this hurdle is overcome, development
of mRNA therapies will be poised to bring
these drugs to market for a broad range of
disorders including additional inborn errors
of metabolism.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
J.V. is an investigator in clinical trials sponsored by Mod-
erna Pharmaceuticals.
REFERENCES
1. Vockley, J., Defay, T., Goldenberg, A.J., and Gaviglio,
A.M. (2023). Scaling genetic resources: New para-
digms for diagnosis and treatment of rare genetic dis-
ease. Am. J. Med. Genet. C Semin. Med. Genet.
193,7 7– 86.
2. Maestri, N.E., Hauser, E.R., Bartholomew, D., and
Brusilow, S.W. (1991). Prospective treatment of
urea cycle disorders. J. Pediatr. 119, 923– 928.
3. Moscioni, D., Morizono, H., McCarter, R.J., Stern, A.,
Cabrera-Luque, J., Hoang, A., Sanmiguel, J., Wu, D.,
Bell, P., Gao, G.P., et al. (2006). Long-term correction
of ammonia metabolism and prolonged survival in
ornithine transcarbamylase-de ﬁcient mice following
liver-directed treatment with adeno-associated viral
vectors. Mol. Ther. 14,2 5– 33.
4. Zhou, J., Liang, S., Yin, L., Frassetto, A., Graham,
A.R., White, R., Principe, M., Severson, M., Palmer,
T., Naidu, S., et al. (2025). Characterization of a novel
conditional knockout mouse model to assess ef ﬁcacy
of mRNA therapy in the context of severe OTC
deﬁciency. Mol. Ther. 10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ymthe.2025.01.010.
5. Enns, G.M., Berry, S.A., Berry, G.T., Rhead, W.J.,
Brusilow, S.W., and Hamosh, A. (2007). Survival after
treatment with phenylacetate and benzoate for urea-
cycle disorders. N. Engl. J. Med. 356, 2282– 2292.
6. Shneider, B.L., Vockley, J., and Mazariegos, G.V.
(2011). Trading places: liver transplantation as a
treatment, not a cure, for metabolic liver disease.
Liver Transpl. 17, 628– 630.
7. An, D., Schneller, J.L., Frassetto, A., Liang, S., Zhu, X.,
Park, J.S., Theisen, M., Hong, S.J., Zhou, J., Rajendran,
R., et al. (2018). Systemic Messenger RNA Therapy as
a Treatment for Methylmalonic Acidemia. Cell Rep.
24, 2520.
8. Baek, R., Coughlan, K., Jiang, L., Liang, M., Ci, L.,
Singh, H., Zhang, H., Kaushal, N., Rajlic, I.L., Van,
L., et al. (2024). Characterizing the mechanism of ac-
tion for mRNA therapeutics for the treatment of pro-
pionic acidemia, methylmalonic acidemia, and
phenylketonuria. Nat. Commun. 15, 3804.
9. Zhao, X.J., Mohsen, A.W., Mihalik, S., Solo, K., Aliu,
E., Shi, H., Basu, S., Kochersperger, C., Van’t Land, C.,
Karunanidhi, A., et al. (2023). Synthetic mRNA res-
cues very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase de ﬁ-
ciency in patient ﬁbroblasts and a murine model.
Mol. Genet. Metab. 138, 106982.
10. Zhao, X.J., Mohsen, A.W., Mihalik, S., Solo, K., Basu,
S., Aliu, E., Shi, H., Kochersberger, C., Karunanidhi,
A., Van’t Land, C., et al. (2023). Messenger RNA res-
cues medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase de ﬁ-
ciency in ﬁbroblasts from patients and a murine
model. Hum. Mol. Genet. 32, 2347–
2356.
11. Kakkis, E.D. (2022). The transformation of drug
development for the 21st century: Time for a change.
Mol. Genet. Metab. 137, 107– 113.
Figure 1. A stylized paradigm for treatment of inborn errors of metabolism
A deﬁcient enzyme leads to an increase in substrate and a decrease in product, either or both of which can lead to
cellular metabolic imbalance. Therapies can reduce the ﬂow of substrate to the enzyme, replace the product, or
replace the enzyme by organ transplantation, nucleic acid therapy, or enzyme replacement therapy. Mutant
enzymes can sometimes be stabilized by small molecule chaperonins or supplementation of excess cofactor(s).
ERT = enzyme replacement therapy. Reproduced with permission from the Society for Inborn Errors of Meta-
bolism North American Metabolic Academy curriculum.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Commentary
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 843