# Source PDF: Reading Literature/files/84/Walkey et al. - 2025 - A comprehensive atlas of AAV tropism in the mouse.pdf



--- Page 1 ---

Original Article
A comprehensive atlas of AAV tropism in the mouse
Christopher J. Walkey, 1,19 Kathy J. Snow, 2,19 Jote Bulcha,3,4,13 Aaron R. Cox, 5,14 Alexa E. Martinez, 1,15
M. Cecilia Ljungberg, 6,7 Denise G. Lanza, 8 Marco De Giorgi, 1 Marcel A. Chuecos, 1 Michele Alves-Bezerra,1,16
Carlos Flores Suarez, 1,17 Sean M. Hartig, 5,9 Susan G. Hilsenbeck, 10 Chih-Wei Hsu,1 Ethan Saville,2 Yaned Gaitan,2
Jeff Duryea, Jr.,2 Seth Hannigan,2 Mary E. Dickinson,1,18 Oleg Mirochnitchenko,11 Dan Wang,3,12 Cathleen M. Lutz,2
Jason D. Heaney, 8 Guangping Gao,3,4 Stephen A. Murray, 2 and William R. Lagor 1
1Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 2The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609 USA;
3Horae Gene Therapy Center and Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 016 05, USA;
4Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases Research, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA; 5Section of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 6Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA; 7Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children ’s Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 8Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; 9Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; 10Dan L. Duncan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; 11Ofﬁce of Research Infrastructure Programs, Division of Program Coordination,
Planning, and Strategic Initiatives, Of ﬁce of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA; 12RNA Therapeutics Institute, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA
Gene therapy with adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors re-
quires knowledge of their tropism within the body. Here we
analyze the tropism of 10 naturally occurring AAV serotypes
(AAV3B, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7, AAV8, AAV9,
AAVrh8, AAVrh10, and AAVrh74) following systemic delivery
into male and female mice. A transgene-expressing ZsGreen
and Cre recombinase was used to identify transduction in a
cell-dependent manner based on ﬂuorescence. Cre-driven acti-
vation of tdTomato ﬂuorescence offered superior sensitivity for
transduced cells. All serotypes except AAV3B and AAV4 had
high liver tropism. Fluorescence activation revealed transduc-
tion of unexpected tissues, including adrenals, testes, and
ovaries. Rare transduced cells within tissues were also readily
visualized. Biodistribution of AAV genomes correlated with
ﬂuorescence, except in immune tissues. AAV4 was found to
have a pan-endothelial tropism while also targeting pancreatic
beta cells. This public resource enables selection of the best
AAV serotypes for basic science and preclinical applications
in mice.
INTRODUCTION
Gene therapy requires ef ﬁcient and speci ﬁc delivery of the nucleic
acid cargo to the tissue and cell type of interest. Over the past three
decades, adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) have emerged as the lead-
ing viral vector for in vivo gene therapy, due to their ef ﬁcacy and
favorable safety proﬁle.
1 AAVs are non-cytopathic and can transduce
both dividing and non-dividing cells. 2 AAV vectors elicit modest and
generally manageable immune responses relative to other viral vec-
tors.
3,4 The recombinant AAV (rAAV) genome forms circular dou-
ble-stranded episomes, which persist in the nucleus of the target
cell. The frequency of chromosomal integrations of rAAV is low,
and reported to be in the range of 1% –3% of hepatocytes in the liver,
as an example.
5,6 AAV vectors have been tested in more than 250 clin-
ical trials, culminating in six products approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration at the time of this report. Despite this progress,
our knowledge of AAV biology remains incomplete. An important
goal is to improve the therapeutic utility of AAVs by broadening
the range and speci ﬁcity of tissues and cell types that can be targeted
for therapy.
AAVs, members of the Parvoviridae family, consist of a 4.7-kb single-
stranded DNA genome,
7 surrounded by a 25-nm diameter non-en-
veloped protein capsid. 8 AAVs are dependoviruses that require a
helper virus, such as adenovirus or a herpes virus, for replication. 9
The wild-type AAV genome contains two genes rep and cap, ﬂanked
on either side by approximately 145 nucleotide hairpin like structures
called inverted terminal repeats (ITRs).
7 The rep gene encodes four
proteins involved in replication, encapsidation, and integration of
the viral genome. The cap gene produces three different capsid
Received 9 October 2024; accepted 22 January 2025;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2025.01.041.
13Present address: 4D Molecular Therapeutics, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA
14Present address: Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA
15Present address: Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA
16Present address: Department of Biomedicine, Biotechnology and Public Health,
Biomedical Research and Innovation Institute of Cadiz (INiBICA), University of
Cadiz, 11002 Cadiz, Spain
17Present address: Department of Experimental Therapeutics, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
18Present address: The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME, 04609
USA
19These authors contributed equally
Correspondence: William R. Lagor, Department of Integrative Physiology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
E-mail: william.lagor@bcm.edu
1282 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 ª 2025
Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy.


--- Page 2 ---

proteins, VP1, VP2, and VP3.10 The VP capsid proteins assemble into
an icosahedral structure of 60 total subunits, in a 1:1:10 ratio. 11 Three
accessory proteins— assembly activating protein,12 membrane-associ-
ated activating protein, 13 and protein X 14— are also encoded in an
alternate open reading frame within Cap. rAAVs are generated by
replacing the rep and cap genes with a transgene expression cassette,
ﬂanked by the ITRs. In principle any transgene cassette up to approx-
imately 4.9 kb can be packaged into rAAV, enabling treatment of
many, but not all, gene therapy targets.
The process of AAV transduction involves multiple sequential events
including (1) trafﬁcking to the target tissue, (2) initial interaction with
glycans at the cell surface, (3) binding to an internalization receptor,
(4) retrograde transport from plasma membrane to the trans-Golgi
network, (5) escape from the endosome, (6) avoidance of degradation
in the cytoplasm, (7) nuclear import, (8) uncoating to release the sin-
gle-stranded DNA genome, (9) second strand synthesis and forma-
tion of circular DNA episomes, and (10) transcription and translation
of the transgene.
15 All steps of this complex itinerary are directed by
interactions between the capsid and host factors on the cell surface or
inside the target cell. Accordingly, the amino acid sequence of the Cap
gene is the single most important determinant of AAV tropism.
At least 13 distinct AAV serotypes encompassing hundreds of natu-
rally occurring genomic variants have been isolated from multiple
vertebrate species.
16,17 AAV serotypes differ in their cap sequence,
with the greatest diversity on surface-exposed variable loop regions
that participate in receptor binding and antigenicity. AAV ’s ﬁrst
interaction with target cells involves glycans present on numerous
plasma membrane proteins. Glycan binding preferences are known
for several serotypes including heparan sulfate proteoglycan for
AAV2,
18 N-linked galactose for AAV9,19 a2-3 or a2-6 N-linked sialic
acid for AAV5,20 and a2-3 O-linked sialic acid for AAV4.20 For some
serotypes, speciﬁc proteins have also been identi ﬁed as co-receptors,
such as aVb5 integrin for AAV2, 21 platelet-derived growth factor for
AAV5,22 and laminin receptor (LamR) for AAVs2, 3 and 9. 23 Most
naturally occurring AAV serotypes, excluding AAV4 and
AAVrh32.33,
24 require a common receptor called AAV receptor
(AAVR) to enter cells. 25 AAVR binds to conserved regions in the
AAV capsid through its IgG-like polycystic kidney disease domains
and facilitates endocytosis.
26 Most AAV serotypes also require inter-
actions with GPR108 to escape from the trans-Golgi network, with
AAV5 as a notable exception. 27
The tropism of rAAV vectors in vivo is determined by a complex
interplay of many factors, including sex, age, dose, route of adminis-
tration, residence time in the circulation, relative abundance of glycan
and internalization receptors, competition between tissues, interac-
tion with the innate and adaptive immune systems, and cell type-de-
pendent pathways. It should be noted that AAV transduction in tissue
culture is inef ﬁcient for most serotypes and does not predict in vivo
tropism. Tropism can also vary greatly across species, and even
among different strains of the same species. For example, AAV3B is
exceptionally poor at transduction of mouse liver, but one of the
best serotypes for human hepatocytes.
28,29 Likewise, the engineered
AAV9 peptide insertion variants AAV-PHP.B which crosses the
blood brain barrier following systemic delivery, are effective only in
mouse strains expressing the LY6A receptor.
30 Despite important
species differences, common themes do emerge, which have greatly
improved our understanding of AAV biology and vectorology.
The mouse remains the primary model for initial preclinical testing of
AAV gene therapies. The vast majority of studies have focused on a
limited subset of commonly used human and primate AAV isolates
due to their likelihood for effective translation to humans. In a sem-
inal paper, Zincarelli et al.
31 performed the most extensive analysis of
AAV tropism in mice to date. The authors proﬁled the biodistribution
and expression of nine AAV serotypes (AAV1 –9) across nine
tissues and six serial timepoints following tail vein injection of a lucif-
erase reporter vector. This study revealed a strong tropism for the
liver for almost all serotypes, with varying kinetics of expression.
The value of such well-controlled comparative studies cannot be
understated. However, the study design did not allow for a detailed
examination of transduction at the level of individual cells and lacked
a broad survey of organs and tissue types. It also focused only on
male mice.
In the current work, we performed a comprehensive survey of AAV
tropism in male and female mice following systemic administration
using ﬂuorescent reporter activation. We de ﬁne the biodistribution
and functional transduction of 10 naturally occurring AAV serotypes
across 22 different tissues, including reproductive organs and HSCs.
By using ﬂuorescent protein activation as a readout of transduction,
we were able to detect rare events and, in some cases, identify speci ﬁc
target cell types. We have identi ﬁed novel tropisms for multiple
serotypes, most notably AAV4, which broadly delivers to endothelial
cells in most tissues as well as beta cells in the pancreas. Our results
have generated a comprehensive atlas of murine AAV tropism that
is freely available to researchers interested in using AAVs as gene
delivery vehicles in vivo . Data and images associated with these
studies are publicly available at https://scge.mcw.edu/toolkit. This
resource will help in the selection of the best serotype for preclinical
gene therapy studies, and open new doors for previously untargetable
cell types.
RESULTS
Vector design and approach
To date, most surveys of AAV tropism in mice have examined only a
few serotypes focusing on small subsets of possible tissues, using
readouts that lack cell type speci ﬁc resolution. To comprehensively
evaluate AAV tropism in mice, we designed an AAV vector with a
bi-directional chicken beta actin (CB) promoter with a cytomegalo-
virus (CMV) enhancer element expressing both ZsGreen and Cre
recombinase (Figure 1A).
32 Recent work indicates that the Cre-medi-
ated activation of a genomically encoded ﬂuorophore is a more sen-
sitive method of detecting AAV transduction than AAV-mediated
delivery.
33,34 We chose to use the Ai9 reporter mouse strain, which
harbors a CAG promoter-driven tdTomato bright red ﬂuorescent
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1283


--- Page 3 ---

reporter gene at the Rosa26 locus, with an intervening loxP-STOP-
loxP cassette.35 The STOP cassette can be removed by Cre, perma-
nently activating tdTomato expression. The Ai9 allele was carried
on the C57BL/6J genetic background (a strain that expresses both
AAVR as well as the LY6A receptor). We reasoned that the delivery
of this bidirectional transgene into Ai9 mice would allow us to simul-
taneously track cells with active transgene expression (ZsGreen), and
those cells with a history of Cre expression (tdTomato) ( Figure 1B).
ZsGreen levels are expected to vary as a function of AAV copy num-
ber per cell, while tdTomato provides a binary readout of transduc-
tion with a particularly bright and uniform signal, also marking
daughter cells. Additionally, biodistribution of the AAV genome
can be measured for a quantitative readout of tissue uptake in relation
to transgene expression.
AAV serotypes were chosen to re ﬂect a diversity of capsid sequences
(Figure 1 C). As secondary criteria, we restricted our choices to nat-
ural serotypes of highest preclinical and/or clinical relevance. Our
ﬁnal list included: AAV3b, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7, AAV8,
AAV9, AAVrh8, AAVrh10, and AAVrh74 ( Figure 1 C).
17,36–40 Fig-
ure 1 D and Table S1 illustrate the relationships between capsid
amino acid sequences. Our experimental work ﬂow is outlined in
Figure 1 E. Five-week-old mice, homozygous for the Ai9 allele at
the Rosa26 locus, were injected intravenously through the tail
vein. This route of administration was chosen to allow even distri-
bution throughout the body. The AAV dosage was 1E12 genome
copies (GC) per mouse, equivalent to approximately 5E13 GC/kg,
intended to maximize the ability to detect extra-hepatic transduc-
AB
CD   
E      
Figure 1. Experimental design for the analysis of
AAV tropism survey in mice
(A) AAV vector design. CMV enhancer element/bidirec-
tional CB promoter allows for expression of both Cre and
ZsGreen from the same AAV vector. (B) Detection. Cells
transduced with AAV will express both the zsGreen ﬂuo-
rescent reporter and Cre recombinase to activate the Ai9
allele. ZsGreen ﬂuorescence reports levels of active AAV
transgene expression, while TdTomato ﬂuorescence
permanently marks cells with a history of transduction. (C)
Serotypes. The transgene cassette was packaged into
the indicated capsid serotypes. (D) Phylogenetic com-
parison of AAV serotypes. VP1 capsid protein sequences
relationships between different natural AAV serotypes.
Serotypes used in this study are highlighted in orange. (E)
Experimental workﬂow. For each serotype, two cohorts of
four to six male and four to six female mice were injected
intravenously and dissected 4 weeks later. From one
cohort, genomic DNA was puriﬁed from a panel of organs
for qPCR analysis. From the second cohort, the same
organs were prepared and imaged by ﬂuorescent micro-
scopy.
tion. To reveal sexual dimorphism with respect
to AAV tropism, and provide suf ﬁcient power
for statistical analysis, four to six mice of each
sex were injected. Four weeks after injection, a panel of 22 organs
was harvested and prepared for either DNA isolation or ﬂuorescent
imaging ( Table S2 ).
Biodistribution
Total DNA was prepared from each organ sample and assayed for the
viral GC number by qPCR. Heatmap summaries of the results are
presented in Figure 2A, while the same data for a subset of individual
serotypes are shown in Figure 2 B and Table S3 . As expected for an
intravenous injection, most serotypes (AAV5 –9, rh8, rh10, and
rh74) displayed the strongest tropism for liver in both male and fe-
male mice, with values exceeding 10
6 GC/mg of genomic DNA. Signif-
icant levels of AAV vector genomes were also observed in samples
from adrenal glands, gastrocnemius muscle, diaphragm, heart, and
skin. Two serotypes were notable exceptions to this pattern.
AAV3B was found to have low transduction overall, with a total com-
bined delivery to all organs of approximately 10
5 GC/mg DNA and did
not target the liver. AAV4 displayed tropism for the lung (1.3 /C2106
GC/mg DNA for males and 2.3 /C2106 GC/mg DNA for females) and
did not seem to transduce the liver effectively. These results closely
match those found previously.
31
This comprehensive survey of serotypes allows for quantitative com-
parisons of delivery within a single organ and across sexes. Figure S1
and Table S4 identify the serotypes that produced the highest vector
GC number in each organ. For example, in lung, AAV4 produced the
highest viral GC number in both male and female mice. In a similar
manner, AAV8 was the most effective serotype for transducing
Molecular Therapy
1284 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 4 ---

bladder. Interestingly, there was some discordance between male and
female mice with respect to the best performing serotypes. In male
mice, AAVrh10 produced the highest combined viral GC number
(5.1 /C210
7 GC/mg DNA), as well as being the top scorer for fourteen
of 20 organs. In female mice, AAVrh74 produced the highest com-
bined viral load (5.1 /C210
7 GC/mg DNA) and was the top scorer in
9 of 20 organs. Overall, some differences were observed between
male and female mice ( Figure S2), including more ef ﬁcient transduc-
tion of liver in males versus female mice, as previously noted. 41,42
Functional transduction
The ability of an AAV to mediate functional transduction resulting in
ﬂuorescent protein expression was assessed by imaging. As
mentioned above, we used two simultaneous strategies to produce
AB
Figure 2. Biodistribution of 10 AAV serotypes across 22 different tissues
(A) Viral biodistribution summary. Total DNA was isolated from each organ in individual mice. Absolute copy numbers of viral genomes were measured by qPCR, and
calculated as AAV GCs per microgram of input DNA and shown on a log 10 scale. n = 4–6 for each serotype and each sex. (B) Sample tissue comparison. qPCR results are
plotted to show all organs assayed for a particular serotype. Results from male (blue) and female (pink) mice injected with AAV9, AAV5, and AAV4 are sho wn, with somatic
organs listed in alphabetical order, and reproductive organs at the end. Error bars represent ± SEM.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1285


--- Page 5 ---

ﬂuorescent reporter molecules: direct ﬂuorescence by expression of
ZsGreen from the vector and Cre-mediated activation of tdTomato
from the Ai9 allele. Initial examination of the images revealed that
signiﬁcantly more cells expressed Cre-activated tdTomato than
ZsGreen. This phenomenon was consistent through all serotypes
and all tissues. A sample of these images comparing ZsGreen and
tdTomato expression in tissues transduced with AAV4 and AAV9
is shown in Figure S3. Depending on the tissue, ZsGreen ﬂuorescence
sometimes displayed a punctate intracellular pattern, and there was
generally higher background observed in the green channel. Given
these factors, we restricted subsequent analyses to the tdTomato
reporter.
Representative images from organs with an average high (liver), me-
dium (adrenal glands), and low (thymus) transduction efﬁciency across
serotypes are shown for all 10 serotypes in Figure 3. Images for all 10
AAV serotypes across the 22 different organs/tissues are shown inFig-
ure S4. As expected from the biodistribution data, a strong tdTomato
signal was observed in the liver for most serotypes with the exceptions
of AAV3B and AAV4 ( Figure 3 A). This result provides an initial
demonstration of the concordance between viral GC number and
functional transduction measured by a ﬂuorescent reporter. Likewise,
tdTomato ﬂuorescence images from the adrenal glands matched the
biodistribution data. In this case,ﬂuorescent imaging revealed a consis-
tent pattern of tdTomato expression in the cortex, especially toward the
center of the organ, while the medulla was relatively untransduced (Fig-
ure 3 B). This result demonstrates the advantage of using ﬂuorescent
imaging to detect transduction: the ability to identify a particular region
or cell type with a different AAV tropism within the intact organ.
Finally, despite the low viral GC in several tissues for a variety of sero-
types, Cre-mediated tdTomato expression was observed in a handful of
cells, for example in the thymus with AAV6 and AAV7 ( Figure 3C).
Likewise, although ﬂuorescent imaging revealed transduction in both
testes and ovaries, the activated cells appeared somatic based on
morphology and location (Figure 4). In testes, tdTomato-positive cells
for all serotypes appeared exclusively outside the seminiferous tubules
(i.e., within the interstitial space), as de ﬁned by DAPI staining ( Fig-
ure 4A). In the ovary, tdTomato-positive cells appeared solely outside
the follicles (i.e., within the medulla) (Figure 4B). Therefore, our imag-
ing did not identify transduction of germ cells by any serotype. Hence,
our technique allows the detection of rare transduction events in single
cells, which may nonetheless be biologically relevant, particularly for
immune cells and the germ line.
To quantify functional transduction, we developed a novel image
scanning technique that quanti ﬁes tdTomato
+ red ﬂuorescence per
total area. Our results are summarized in Figure 5 and Table S5 .
Notably, these results seem to closely match the viral biodistribution
data from Figure 2 . For both males and females, liver is the most
heavily transduced organ for serotypes for AAV5 –9, rh8, rh10, and
rh74, reaching the maximum value of 100%. Adrenal gland, heart,
and muscle (diaphragm and gastrocnemius) also produced strong
signal for these serotypes. For AAV4, lung had the highest percentage
of tdTomato-positive cells in males, as expected from our bio-
distribution data. For females transduced with AAV4, heart and
diaphragm showed a slightly higher percentage of tdTomato-positive
cell and ﬁber area than lung ( Figures 5 and S5).
Nonetheless, some differences between the viral biodistribution data
and functional transduction were observed. For example, AAVrh8,
rh10, and rh74 produced a signi ﬁcant number of tdTomato-positive
cells in the uterus ( Figures 5 A, S4, and S5), despite a relatively low
viral GC number ( Figure 2 A). Therefore, we sought to establish an
overall correlation for all tissues and serotypes between viral GC
number and tdTomato-positive cells ( Figure S6). The results indicate
a strong overall correlation between viral GC number and tdTomato
+
cells. Interestingly, the data produced sigmoidal curves. At the low
end, this result suggests that a certain threshold of viral particles
can enter a tissue before tdTomato allele activation by Cre occurs.
At the high end, the curve ﬂattens once tdTomato-positive cells reach
100%, and further transduction cannot be registered. Graphs with the
same correlation data for individual organs are shown in Figure S7 .
For most tissues, a direct relationship between viral GCs and tdTo-
mato-positive cells is evident. However, three organs — spleen,
thymus, and lymph nodes — seem to show reasonably high vector
GC number without a corresponding amount of tdTomato-positive
cells. This apparent non-functional transduction (DNA delivery
without transgene expression) may be related to the immune function
of these organs or re ﬂect promoter-speciﬁc silencing in these tissues.
AAV4 has a pan-endothelial tropism and transduces pancreatic
islets
The tropism of AAV4 differed signi ﬁcantly from all the other sero-
types tested, with poor liver transduction and a very strong signal
in lung. This less studied AAV serotype is one of the most distinct
in terms of capsid sequence and has a unique preference for a2-3
O-linked sialic acid.
20 AAV4 was reported to exhibit a cardiopulmo-
nary tropism based on vector genomes and luciferase imaging, 43 but
speciﬁc cell types were not identi ﬁed. To further interrogate cell type
speciﬁcity, we generated AAV4 vectors expressing Cre recombinase,
driven by either the CB promoter with CMV enhancer, or the EF1al-
pha promoter. These vectors did not express ZsGreen, allowing a
broader range of ﬂuorescent markers to be used for analysis. Intrave-
nous delivery via the tail vein of AAV4-Cre to Ai9 mice resulted in
substantial tdTomato-positive signal in lung outside the airways
(Figure 6A). Flow cytometry revealed that the majority of tdTomato
signal originated from endothelial cells based on CD31
+/CD45/C0
expression. Remarkably, more than 85% of lung endothelial cells
were transduced by AAV4 in both male and female mice. In contrast,
only approximately 20% of non-immune, non-endothelial cells in the
lung appeared to be transduced by AAV4 ( Figure 6B).
These striking results prompted us to ask whether AAV4 might
also transduce endothelial cells in other vascular beds, a historically
neglected cell type for gene therapy applications. The experiment
was repeated using an AAV4 vector expressing Cre driven by the
EF1alpha promoter. To label the lumenal endothelial surface of the
vasculature, DyLight649-conjugated tomato lectin was injected
Molecular Therapy
1286 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 6 ---

A
B
C
Figure 3. Functional transduction detected by ﬂuorescent imaging
Organ samples were prepared and imaged for ﬂuorescent tdTomato (red) indicative of functional transduction. Nuclei were stained for DAPI (blue). Re presentative images
from (A) liver (high transduction), (B) adrenal glands (medium transduction) and (C) thymus (low transduction) for each serotype are shown. Scale ba rs are 200 mm.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1287


--- Page 7 ---

intravenously before dissection. Sections from multiple organs were
prepared at a thickness of forty microns and imaged for the ﬂuores-
cent lectin and tdTomato. As expected, liver was poorly transduced
with AAV4 showing only sparse dTomato
+ hepatocytes and possible
signal in isolated liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. In stark contrast,
impressive transduction of endothelial cells was seen in the stomach,
bladder, adrenals, pancreas, brain, small intestine, and thymus ( Fig-
ure 6C). A clear and distinct endothelial signal was also observed in
the large intestine, muscle, lymph nodes, skin, ovary, and uterus
(Figure S8 ). In separate experiments, we also con ﬁrmed strong
endothelial delivery to the retina ( Figure S9A). AAV4 also mediated
transduction of the largest vessel in the body, hitting 26% of endothe-
lial cells in the thoracic aorta ( Figure S9B).
In addition to its apparent pan-endothelial tropism, we also noted
strong signal in pancreatic islets with AAV4 ( Figure S4). To con ﬁrm
this result, we performed a second experiment with the Cre-only
AAV4 construct. Co-staining with an antibody to insulin con ﬁrmed
efﬁcient transduction of beta cells with AAV4 ( Figure 6 D). We re-
examined other serotypes for transduction of pancreatic islets in
our initial experiments ( Figure S10 A). Although AAV8 seemed to
have some tropism for islets, it was much less speci ﬁc, with strong
tdTomato signal from surrounding acinar cells following intravenous
delivery ( Figure S10 B). AAV5 also seemed to transduce islets,
although much less ef ﬁciently than AAV4. Strong transduction of
pancreatic acinar cells was seen for AAV7, 9, rh8, rh10, and rh74.
Hematopoietic and immune cell transduction
We also analyzed transduction efﬁciency of bone marrow-derived he-
matopoietic stem and progenitor cells, as well as circulating leuko-
cytes. Cells isolated from bone marrow were stained with the appro-
priate antibodies to identify functional transduction by Cre-induced
A
B
Figure 4. Functional transduction of testes and ovary
tdTomato ﬂuorescence (red) and DAPI nuclei (blue) for tissues from mice transduced with the indicated serotypes in (A) testes and (B) ovary. Scale bar s are 200 mm.
Molecular Therapy
1288 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 8 ---

tdTomato expression by ﬂow cytometry (Figures 7 and S11; Table S6).
Strong transduction of short- and long-term HSCs and multipotent
progenitor cells (MPP1, MPP2, and MPP3) was observed for multiple
serotypes. For AAVrh8, rh10, and rh74 transduction ef ﬁciency was
greater than 50% in both males and females ( Figures 7 A, 7B, and
S11A). Interestingly, AAV7 seemed to transduce HSCs more ef ﬁ-
ciently in males than in females (66% vs. 53%; p = 0.03), while for
AAV8, females showed a higher transduction ef ﬁciency in these cells
compared with males (67% vs. 48%; p = 0.02). Interestingly, AAV9,
which exhibited broad biodistribution and functional transduction
across multiple organs, was relatively inef ﬁcient in bone marrow-
derived cells.
AB
Figure 5. Quantiﬁcation of functional transduction across tissues
(A) Image quantiﬁcation. tdTomato signal in each image was measured to quantify transduction efﬁciency from four images for each organ, serotype and sex, and expressed
as a percentage of maximum coverage ( n = 4) Results are shown as a heatmap. (B) Sample tissue comparison. Image quantiﬁcation results are plotted to show all organs
assayed for a particular serotype. Results from male (blue) and female (pink) mice injected with AAV9, AAV5, and AAV4 are shown, with somatic organs li sted in alphabetical
order, and reproductive organs at the end.
Error bars represent ± SEM.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1289


--- Page 9 ---

This analysis was extended to lineage-committed cell types within the
bone marrow. Committed progenitor cells were generally less trans-
duced than stem cells and multipotent progenitors ( Figures 7 C and
S11B). Common myeloid progenitors were more strongly transduced
than common lymphoid progenitors in both males and females by
multiple AAV serotypes. However, the more differentiated myeloid
progenitor cell types, granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, and
megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors were less transduced. Circu-
lating leukocytes were also assayed for transduction, following isola-
tion of peripheral blood mononucleated cells. Notably, overall trans-
duction ef ﬁciency was signi ﬁcantly lower for these cells compared
AB
C
D
Figure 6. AAV4 exhibits a unique tropism for
endothelial cells and pancreatic beta cells
(A) Transduction of pulmonary endothelial cells by AAV4 -
Fluorescent images and ﬂow cytometry plots showing
induction of tdTomato expression (upper right quadrant) in
endothelial cells (CD31
+, CD45 /C0) following injection with
AAV4-Cre. (B) Quantiﬁcation of pulmonary endothelial
cell transduction ﬂow cytometry results. Error bars
represent ± SEM. (C) Transduction of endothelial cells in
multiple tissues. Tissue sections from negative control
and AAV4-Cre injected mice are shown, with DAPI
staining for nuclei (blue), DyLight649-lectin staining for
endothelial cells (yellow) and tdTomato (red). (D)
Pancreas sections were stained with a ﬂuorescently
labelled insulin antibody and imaged by confocal
microscopy. Scale bars are 100 mm.
with bone marrow-derived cells. For all cell
types and serotypes, mean transduction ef ﬁ-
ciencies were less than 10% ( Figures 7 D and
S11C). Nonetheless, some differences were
observed. CD11c + monocytes, which includes
dendritic cells, were more highly transduced
than other cell types, especially by AAVrh74.
In contrast, natural killer (NK) cells showed a
stronger transduction by AAV5 than other
serotypes. Our results have produced the most
complete survey of AAV tropism in the mouse
hematopoietic system to date.
DISCUSSION
Currently, the most cited survey of AAV
tropism in mice comes from the work Zincarelli
et al.
31 This study explored the viral bio-
distribution of nine AAV serotypes (AAV1 –9)
across eight organs (brain, kidney, heart, liver,
lung, skeletal muscle, and testes). Systemic
intravenous injection was used because it pro-
vides broad tissue distribution and is broadly
therapeutically relevant. The AAVs used in the
experiments carried luciferase expression cas-
settes under a ubiquitous promoter, allowing se-
rial measurement of functional transduction
through bioluminescent imaging. Their results identi ﬁed AAV9 as
having the widest organ distribution and highest transgene expres-
sion. However, this study was limited to male mice, and did not allow
examination of transduction at the level of individual cells. More
recent surveys have focused on assessing AAV tropism among cell
types within a speci ﬁc organ, including brain,
44,45 and eye, 44,45 or
from a single serotype. 46
Here, we performed a comprehensive evaluation of AAV tropism in
mice, the most widely used preclinical model organism for gene ther-
apy. Our experiments expand on prior work in several important
Molecular Therapy
1290 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 10 ---

ways. We examined 10 serotypes originally isolated from humans
(AAV3B, AAV5, AAV6, and AAV9) and non-human primates
(AAV4, AAV7, AAV8, AAVrh8, AAVrh10, and AAVrh74), with a
diversity of capsid structures. Our organ panel consisted of 22 sepa-
rate tissues, as well hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, and
circulating immune cells. A dose of 1E12 GC (10-fold higher than
in Zincarelli et al.) was chosen to ensure extrahepatic transduction
was effectively captured. We also included both male and female
mice in our analyses. Perhaps most important, we determined func-
tional transduction by ﬂuorescent imaging of individual organ sec-
tions. This technique allowed a detailed examination of functional
transduction at the level of individual cells, rather than the broad or-
gan-level detection of transgene expression from bioluminescence or
beta-gal staining that is used traditionally. Additionally, by testing se-
rotypes individually we avoided competition for common receptors
or variable representation which can confound pooled library
approaches.
Results from our evaluation of viral biodistribution correlate well with
the previous ﬁndings. In general, our values for viral GCs detected,
calculated as GC/ mg total genomic DNA, were concordant with pre-
viously published values.
31 As expected, most serotypes (AAV6 –9,
rh8, rh10, and rh74) preferentially transduced the liver. In addition,
muscle (gastrocnemius and diaphragm), as well as heart, was strongly
AB
C
D
Figure 7. Transduction of HSCs, progenitor cells, and leukocytes
(A) Schematic of the HSC and leukocyte lineages tested. (B) Percentage of transduced long term, short term and multipotent progenitors from bone marr ow, determined by
tdTomato ﬂuorescence via ﬂow cytometry. Colors on heat maps indicate percent tdTomato-positive cells in each cell population. (C) Percentage of tra nsduced myeloid and
lymphoid lineage-committed cells from bone marrow. (D) Percentage of transduced circulating leukocytes (peripheral blood leukocytes) isolated f rom peripheral blood.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1291


--- Page 11 ---

transduced by these serotypes. Notably, these serotypes are closely
related evolutionarily, reinforcing the role of capsid structure in deter-
mining viral tropism. 17 AAV5, which is the phylogenetically most
distant from other serotypes, also transduced liver but failed to effec-
tively transduce muscle and heart.
By examining both male and female mice, we were able to uncover
evidence of sexual dimorphism with respect to AAV tropism across
the natural serotypes tested. As expected, stronger liver transduction
was seen in males than females for most serotypes.
41 The notable
exception was AAVrh74, which produced a pronounced preference
for transduction in female mice, not only in liver, but across all or-
gans. In contrast, AAVrh10 showed a transduction preference for
males for all organs except lymph nodes, which were very weakly
transduced in both sexes. AAV6 also demonstrated a bias toward
transduction in males across multiple organs. For most other organs
and serotypes, sex differences were relatively minor. Nonetheless,
sexual dimorphism remains an important consideration for AAV-
mediated gene therapy, given the potential impact on ef ﬁcacy.
47
The extent and nature of sexual dimorphism in human AAV gene
therapy remains an open question.
To generate data revealing functional transduction, we used a dual
ﬂuorescent reporter strategy. The transgene contained within our
AAVs expressed both the ZsGreen ﬂuorescent reporter and Cre re-
combinase. In the Ai9 reporter strain used in the studies, Cre expres-
sion drives activation of tdTomato ﬂuorescent reporter expression.
This event permanently marks the targeted cell and its daughter cells
after transduction. During our initial examination of our ﬂuorescent
images, we noted that Cre-driven tdTomato expression was visible in
signiﬁcantly more cells than ZsGreen, irrespective of the tissue or
serotype. tdTomato activation also had an excellent signal-to-noise
ratio, allowing for more accurate discrimination of positive cells
from background ﬂuorescence. Hence, we found that this technique
was the most sensitive mechanism for detecting transduction, corrob-
orating recent ﬁndings.
33
Our results strongly reinforce the utility of ﬂuorescent imaging for
the detection of functional AAV transduction. We detected rare
transduction events in individual cells from multiple tissues where
the biodistribution data suggested a low tropism for a particular
serotype. From a clinical point of view, rare transduction events by
a therapeutic AAV may be consequential. Therefore, our results
demonstrate the need for careful analysis of transduction of non-
target tissues. In particular, we focused on sex organs for evidence
of non-target transduction, given concerns over the possible germline
transmission of genome alterations.
We noted signiﬁcant transduction of both testes and ovaries. Howev-
er, in testes only somatic cells located outside the tubules were trans-
duced. Likewise in ovaries, the transduced cells appeared outside the
follicles, also indicating that they were not part of the germ line.
Schuettrumpf et al.
48 found that vector genomes are detectable in
semen from rabbits receiving an intravenous injection of AAV2 vec-
tors. In follow-up work, Favaro et al. 49 analyzed the risk of germline
transmission following intravenous delivery of AAV2 and AAV8 vec-
tors expressing factor IX to rabbits. Although rAAV genomes were
shed in rabbit semen, these were thought to be derived primarily
from epithelial cells from the genitourinary tract. Studies in mice
conﬁrm that AAV genomes are shed in semen, but consistently
show a lack of transmission to offspring,
50–52 even when mouse sper-
matozoa are directly exposed to high doses of AAV2 before in vitro
fertilization.53 The risk of germline transmission could theoretically
be greater with AAV-based genome editing approaches. Nonetheless,
we did not ﬁnd evidence of germ cell delivery in either male or female
mice using a highly sensitive reporter that permanently marks trans-
duced cells.
Strong physical and functional transduction by AAV6 –9, plus rh8,
rh10, and rh74 serotypes was also observed in adrenal glands, an or-
gan not included in previous comparative surveys of AAV tropism,
but which has previously been found to be transduced by AAV9.
46
This result validates our decision to include smaller, less frequently
examined organs in our survey. Imaging revealed that the transduc-
tion occurred primarily in the cortex, rather than the medulla. Adre-
nal glands should hence be considered not only as a tissue potentially
targetable with AAV delivery, but also one to consider in terms of side
effects originating from non-target tissues. Further work is needed to
determine to what degree this organ may also be transduced in non-
human primates.
Two serotypes differed in the liver-dominant tropism most frequently
observed, with a viral GC number 100-fold lower in this organ
compared with the other serotypes. Interestingly, these two serotypes,
AAV3B and AAV4, differed in their tropism in non-hepatic tissues.
AAV3B did not seem to transduce other organs in the place of liver.
Instead, it did not seem to have an afﬁnity for any speciﬁc organ. This
effect may be speciﬁc for mice, since previous studies have shown that
while this serotype has a poor tropism for mouse liver, it can strongly
transduce hepatocytes from humans and non-human primates.
29 The
greatest physical transduction for AAV3B was observed in lymph
nodes and spleen, although ﬂuorescent imaging did not indicate func-
tional transduction of these organs by this serotype. It is possible,
given the role of these organs in mediating immune responses, that,
in these tissues, virus particles are taken up but processed to generate
an immune response, rather than for gene delivery. These bio-
distribution data provide useful information about potential latent
reservoirs of AAV that impact adaptive immunity and long-term
efﬁcacy.
A major ﬁnding of this work is the pan-endothelial tropism of AAV4,
a lesser studied AAV serotype that is dif ﬁcult to produce at high titer.
AAV4 transduced the liver relatively poorly, but strong transduction
was observed in the lung, as previously reported.
31,43 We found that
pulmonary endothelial cells are the primary cell type targeted in the
lung with AAV4 by the intravenous route. We also noted substantial
and highly speci ﬁc endothelial cell transduction by AAV4 in
many other organs (>10 different tissues), opening the door for
Molecular Therapy
1292 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 12 ---

endothelial-directed gene therapies. AAV4 differs from other sero-
types not only in capsid structure but also in its unique af ﬁnity for
a2-3 O-linked sialic acid.20,43 Interestingly, AAV4 is the only serotype
we tested which does not require AAVR for cell entry, potentially ex-
plaining its poor liver tropism. It is also not clear why AAV4 is so
effective for endothelial cells, although other serotypes (i.e., AAV8,
AAV9) are presumably transcytosed through the endothelial barrier
to enter parenchymal cells. Further work is needed to identify the
endocytosis receptor for AAV4 and to de ﬁne its intracellular traf-
ﬁcking itinerary, which results in endothelial transduction rather
than transcytosis. In terms of pancreatic islet delivery, AAV8 has
long been known to transduce beta cells following intravenous or
intraperitoneal injection in mice.
54–58 Previously, AAV8 was used
to transduce acinar cells with three key beta cell transcription factors,
attempting to convert acinar cells to restore depleted beta cells in dia-
betes.
59 However, AAV4 seems to have the greatest selectivity for beta
cells over the acinar cells in pancreas with systemic intravenous
delivery. Thus, our observations may be useful for the design of
delivery vehicles for gene therapies that could directly target expan-
sion of beta cells in diabetes.
There is growing interest in targeting hematopoietic stem and pro-
genitor cells for in vivo gene therapy and genome editing. Previous
data suggest signi ﬁcant transduction of bone marrow-derived HSCs
by AAV6, AAV8, and AAV9.
60 Our data corroborate and extend
these results. AAV-based gene editing of such cells within the bone
marrow niche would allow for life changing gene therapies. For
example, ex vivo gene editing therapies have just been approved for
sickle cell disease and beta thalassemia. However, the high cost of
such therapies combined with the dif ﬁcult logistics of bone marrow
conditioning means that they are unlikely to be fully translated on
a global scale to the populations who would most bene ﬁt. A single-
dose AAV gene therapy that can target the bone marrow following
systemic administration would be very powerful. It is also noteworthy
that some immune cell populations were transduced in peripheral
blood, primarily CD11c
+ monocytes, NK cells, and CD8 T cells, albeit
with much lower ef ﬁciency. These cell types are potential targets
for cancer immunotherapies (i.e., chimeric antigen receptor T and
chimeric antigen receptor NK cells), as well as gene editing to eradi-
cate residual HIV infection. Effectiveness of such therapies will
depend both on the mode of action, as well as ef ﬁciency of delivery.
This also suggests that unintended transduction of immune cell pop-
ulations may play an underappreciated role in the safety and ef ﬁcacy
of AAV gene therapies in general.
The natural AAV capsids examined in this paper are amenable to
engineering by multiple means, including rational design,
61 PCR
shufﬂing,62 mutagenic PCR, 43 library screens, 63 peptide display, 64
biopanning,65 and directed evolution. 66,67 PCR shuf ﬂing has been a
very successful approach, taking advantage of sequences already
determined by evolution to be compatible with capsid assembly.
Creating capsids rearranged from the naturally occurring serotypes
can confer new and unexpected properties. For example, AAV-DJ
is a chimeric capsid of AAV2/AAV8/AAV9 with enhanced transduc-
tion of liver and lower extrahepatic transduction, along with a
reduced innate immune response.
62 Likewise, AAV-LK03 68 and
AAV-NP5969 are shuf ﬂed capsids selected based on their improved
afﬁnity for human over murine hepatocytes. Peptide insertion
mutants, most often into the AAV2 or AAV9 capsid, can have a pro-
found effect on vector tropism. For example, natural AAV serotypes
are resistant to crossing the blood-brain barrier. Screening of seven-
amino acid peptide sequences inserted into the AAV9 capsid revealed
a variant, named AAV-PHP.B, that was 40-fold more ef ﬁcient at
transducing the CNS.
64 Additional peptide screening resulted in
the identi ﬁcation of two further arti ﬁcial capsids: AAV-PHP.eB,
with enhanced transduction of the brain, and AAV-PHP.S, with
enhanced transduction in dorsal root ganglion and enteric and
cardiac neurons. 70 Other notable peptide insertion mutants into
AAV9 have been engineered for improved muscle delivery, such
as AAVMYO
71 and MyoAAV, 72 among others. There have also
been considerable efforts to de ﬁne the capsid regions involved in
receptor binding of many natural serotypes. Purposeful mutagenesis
of these residues also can afford major gains, by detargeting
particular organs such as liver.
73,74 We anticipate that our data on
the 10 natural serotypes in this paper will support further capsid en-
gineering efforts.
We administered AAVs by intravenous injection to maximize tissue
distribution, avoiding any physical restriction to any particular organ.
However, it is well recognized that the route of administration has a
tremendous impact on tropism. For example, the natural serotypes
tested in our studies do not cross the blood-brain barrier ef ﬁciently,
but could be effective at transduction if delivered to the correct
biological compartment. A previous study using direct intracerebral
injection of ﬁve natural AAV serotypes revealed signi ﬁcant transduc-
tion for AAV5, AAV7, and AAV9, with reduced tropism for AAV2
and AAV8.
75 These results differ from our biodistribution and func-
tional transduction results, and almost certainly re ﬂect the difference
in delivery route. A recent survey of 20 natural and engineered AAV
serotypes delivered to mouse lung by intratracheal instillation identi-
ﬁed a transduction ef ﬁciency of 30% for AAV4 in airway epithelium,
but insigni ﬁcant transduction in pulmonary endothelial cells. These
results reinforce the critical role that delivery route plays in deter-
mining AAV tropism.
76
The experiments described in this paper were limited to Ai9 mice on a
C57BL/6J genetic background. We chose this strain because of its
wide use in research, particularly in the context of preclinical gene
therapy. Nonetheless, differences in AAV tropism among mouse
strains have been noted, and variances in transduction patterns
may occur. For example, intracerebral delivery of ﬁve natural AAV
serotypes (AAV2, AAV5, AAV7, AAV8, and AAV9) revealed signif-
icant differences between C57BL/6 mice and FVB mice.
75 AAV5 and
AAV7 produced higher transduction in the cortex of C57BL/6 mice
than FVB mice. Contralateral spreading of transduction was also
markedly reduced in FVB compared with C57BL/6 following intra-
striatal injection. In another example, the LY6A receptor is required
for blood-brain barrier transcytosis and CNS transduction of the
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1293


--- Page 13 ---

engineered AAV9 derivative AAV-PHP.B following intravenous
administration.30 C57BL6/J and FVB strains both express the LY6A
receptor, but other laboratory strains such as BALB/c and CB do
not, making them nonpermissive to CNS delivery via the intravenous
route. Similarly, it is likely that AAVR expression also varies across
strains which may result in differences in overall or tissue-speci ﬁc
transduction. Genetic manipulation of endogenous AAVR expression
has been used to improve surveys of hepatocyte tropism in human
liver chimeric mice,
77 as well as to hardwire arti ﬁcial AAV tropism
for basic science research in a Cre-dependent manner. 78 Systematic
examinations of AAV tropism across inbred mouse strains could be
combined with genetic screens to learn more about AAV biology,
but is beyond the scope of the current work.
It remains to be determined how translatable these tropism data are
to humans. Although there are many examples where tropism does
not translate well across species, many common themes exist. For
example, most approved AAV gene therapy products involve
AAV2, AAV5, AAV8, or AAV9 capsids. These vectors were tested
extensively in mouse, primate, and/or canine models before progress-
ing to human clinical trials. Vectors capable of transducing liver, skel-
etal muscle, CNS, and retina are generally effective across multiple
species, albeit with varying ef ﬁciency. An important endeavor will
be comparing tropism data from mice reported here, with that ob-
tained in non-human primates, as well as with clinical outcomes.
Ideally, cross-species-compatible vectors can be developed for speciﬁc
tissues using these data as a starting point, thus streamlining the
development of gene therapies from initial proof of concept in mice
to ultimate application in humans.
All data from these experiments are available through the Somatic
Cell Genome Editing Consortium Toolkit ( https://scge.mcw.edu/
toolkit) for further exploration and analysis. We believe this resource
will be immediately useful for other researchers engaged in capsid en-
gineering to target speci ﬁc cell types or tissues in mouse models, as
well as for avoiding unintended delivery to non-target tissues. These
data will inform the community of the most effective vectors for pre-
clinical gene therapy in mice, and more broadly improve our under-
standing of AAV biology. Moreover, the detailed documentation of
targeted tissues and cell types, including the germline, is critical to
the ongoing development and deployment of genome editor-based
therapeutics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
rAAV production
AAV vectors were produced by standard triple-transfection in
HEK293 cells. Three days post transfection, cells and culture media
were harvested, and crude lysates were prepared. Downstream puri-
ﬁcation was carried out by two rounds of CsCl sedimentation fol-
lowed by dialysis. Puri ﬁed AAV vectors were sterilized using a
0.22-micron ﬁlter and formulated in PBS with 5% sorbitol and
0.001% of F-68. AAV vector genome titers were determined by
droplet digital PCR. AAV vector purity was assessed by gel electro-
phoresis followed by silver staining.
AAV transduction in mice
Mice used in experiments were from the Ai9 strain, B6.Cg- Gt(ROSA)
26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J (Madisen et al. 2010, JAX# 007909). At
5 weeks of age, male and female mice were injected intravenously
through the tail vein with rAAV. Injections were carried out in par-
allel at BCM and JAX using the same viral batch. Four to six mice
of each sex were injected with AAVs of each serotype. Dosage was
1E12 GC/mouse, in a total volume of 0.2 mL PBS. Following injection,
mice were housed under standard conditions, and fed ad libitum ,
while monitoring for weight loss or other health issues. After 4 weeks,
the mice were humanely euthanized and dissected for biodistribution
and functional transduction analyses. In experiments involving label-
ing of endothelial cells, 100 mg of DyLight649-labelled Lycopersicon
esculentum (tomato) lectin (Vector Laboratories, DL-1178-1) was in-
jected intravenously through the tail vein in a volume of 0.1 mL just
before euthanasia and dissection. Tissue samples from each organ
were prepared for imaging as described below. In addition, small sam-
ples (approximately 50 mg) were ﬂash frozen in liquid nitrogen and
stored at /C080
/C14C for subsequent genomic DNA preparation. For brain
samples, one hemisphere cut sagittally was used for DNA prepara-
tion, to account for possible differences in AAV transduction between
regions. All animal work was performed in accordance with the
guidelines for animal care at Baylor College of Medicine (BCM)
and the Jackson Laboratory (JAX), under approved Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee protocols.
DNA isolation and qPCR
Total DNA (viral and mouse genomic) isolation from frozen samples
was performed using DNeasy Blood & Tissue kits (Qiagen) according
to the manufacturer ’s instructions. Tissue disruption steps were
repeated twice on muscle and heart samples to ensure quantitative re-
covery of DNA. The DNA concentration in each sample was assayed
by ﬂuorescence using a Quant-iT Broad Range kit (Invitrogen). Ab-
solute viral GC numbers in each sample were determined by SYBR-
based qPCR using a standard curve with the AAV transgene plasmid
and validated primers speciﬁc to the Cre recombinase transgene (for-
ward: 5
0-TGA CGG TGG GAG AAT GTT AAT C-30; reverse: 50-GCT
ACA CCA GAG ACG GAA ATC-3 0).33 Results were calculated as
AAV GCs/mg total input DNA.
Fluorescent imaging
Tissue preparation and imaging at JAX were carried out as follows.
Twelve mice per AAV serotype treatment group were euthanized
via CO2 asphyxiation. For collection of blood cells and bone marrow
for ﬂow cytometry analysis, immediately following con ﬁrmation of
expiration, peripheral blood (250 –500 mL) was collected via cardiac
puncture into K2-EDTA microtainer tubes (BD #365974) and leg
bones (either 2 two or one femur and one tibia) were collected into
cold 1/C2PBS in 12-well plates for isolation of bone marrow. The re-
maining tissues: brain (sagittal bisection), eyes, inguinal lymph
node, skin, bladder, ovary, uterus, epididymis, testes, large intestine,
gastrocnemius muscle, diaphragm, heart, thymus, lung, spleen, kid-
ney, liver, adrenal gland, pancreas, small intestine, and stomach
were collected into seven vials and immersion ﬁxed in 25 mL, cold
Molecular Therapy
1294 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 14 ---

4% PFA in 1 /C2PBS per vial at 4 /C14C on a shaking incubator for 4 –5h .
Tissues were washed in cold 1 /C2PBS twice and then transferred to
into cold 30% sucrose/1 /C2 PBS solution on a shaking incubator
overnight to equilibrate. Excess connective tissue was trimmed and
tissues were combined into seven groups per block to minimize the
number of blocks per mouse, and then immersed in Tissue-Tek
O.C.T in cryomolds, frozen on dry ice, and stored at /C080
/C14C. Tissues
were cryosectioned at 15 mm and sections mounted on Superfrost
Plus slides (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc), allowed to air dry for approx-
imately 10 min at room temp, and washed with 1 /C2PBS twice for
5 min. Slides were then stained with 1:10,000 Hoechst in 1 /C2PBS
for 5 min, washed 2 /C2 with 1 /C2 PBS and slides mounted using
ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant, cured overnight, sealed
with clear nail polish. Tissues were imaged using a wide ﬁeld DMi8
microscope (Leica) using a 10 /C2or 20 /C2objective. Representative
sections from each tissue were analyzed and at least three animals
per sex per treatment were assessed, with most including four mice
per sex per treatment. Quanti ﬁcation of tdTomato (RFP) signal and
thus viral transduction was performed as follows: images were opened
in QuPath,
79 and cells were detected using the built-in watershed cell
detection function based on DAPI/nuclear signal. All images from the
same tissue type were processed with the same cell detection settings,
with only slight changes in parameters used for different tissues to
account for changing cell and nuclear diameters (i.e., adjusting sigma
microns [range, 0.5 –0.9] and cell expansion microns). Background
signal for RFP expression was determined empirically from unin-
jected control tissues from Ai9 mice imaged at de ﬁned increasing
exposure times and used to set detection threshold minimums for
each image. RFP signal above background threshold was scored per
cell (co-localization). Data recorded per image includes the total
number of DAPI nuclei (cells) and the number of nuclei, which
had RFP signal above threshold (transduced cells) and we report
the calculated percent of transduced RFP
+ cells out of the total num-
ber of cells per image (RFP + cells/total cells /C2100%).
Tissue preparation and imaging at BCM were carried out as follows.
Following euthanasia, animals were perfused brie ﬂy with PBS
through a cardiac puncture, then organs were dissected. Tissue sam-
ples from each organ were placed in 8 mL of freshly prepared 4% buff-
ered paraformaldehyde and ﬁxed overnight at 4
/C14C with mild shaking.
The next day, ﬁxed samples were transferred to a 15% buffered su-
crose solution, then 3 h later, transferred to a 30% buffered sucrose
solution for equilibration overnight at 4
/C14C. Next, the ﬁxed and cryo-
preserved samples were frozen in OCT, sectioned at 14 mm, DAPI-
stained for nuclei, and imaged on an Axioscan Z.1 slide scanner
(Zeiss) under a 20 /C2objective, with the appropriate ﬂuorescence set-
tings, at the RNA In Situ Hybridization Core at BCM. Sectioning was
performed to maximize the imaged tissue surface area for each organ.
Three non-consecutive sections from each sample were imaged. For
experiments involving lectin labeling of the vasculature, 40- mm sec-
tions were prepared to generate a wider depth of ﬁeld.
Aortas were prepared for imaging by cutting the left and right carotid
arteries and the left subclavian artery to release the aortic arch. Then,
the aorta was cut at the level of the diaphragm. The heart and aortic
arch were removed, and the remaining thoracic aorta was en face
opened and pinned on a dissecting dish with the luminal side facing
up. The thoracic aorta was ﬁxed overnight with 4% PFA (in PBS),
then incubated overnight with 30% sucrose (in PBS) and stored in
PBS at 4
/C14C afterward. Am approximately 4-mm piece of aorta was
cut and stained with DAPI (1:5,000 dilution in PBS, D3571, Invitro-
gen) for 5 min, followed by a wash in PBS for 3 min. Then, the sample
was placed ﬂat on a glass slide with the lumen faced up and covered
with a coverslip with glycerol. Direct tdTomato, DyLight649-lectin
and DAPI ﬂuorescence were detected using a Nikon A1-Rs confocal
microscope using a 60 /C2objective at the Integrated Microscopy Core
(BCM). Confocal sections were acquired every 2mm from the lumenal
side to the ﬁrst layer of smooth muscle cells.
For immuno ﬂuorescence images of pancreatic islets, PFA- ﬁxed and
frozen pancreas sections were brought to room temperature for
5 min and then placed 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min. A 1-h
block was performed with 5% donkey serum in PBS, followed by a
2-h incubation with primary antibodies to insulin (1:1,500; rabbit;
Cell Signaling #3014s; RRID: AB_2126503) or amylase (1:1,000,
mouse, Santa Cruz #sc-46657, RRID: AB_626668). Slides were
washed twice in 0.01% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min each.
Slides were then incubated with secondary antibodies for donkey
anti-rabbit (1:1000; Jackson ImmunoResearch #711-175-152, RRID:
AB_2340607) and DAPI (1:2,000; Sigma #32670) followed by two
washes in 0.01% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min each and coverslip
mounting with Prolong Gold Antifade (Invitrogen #P36930). Omis-
sion of the primary antibody was used a control. Images were
captured on a Nikon A1R confocal microscope.
Flow cytometry
To assess pulmonary endothelial cell transduction, three male and
three female Ai9 mice were injected intravenously through the tail
vein with 5E+11 GC/mouse of AAV4-CB6-PI-Cre. One male and
one female mouse were injected with saline as negative controls.
Mice were humanely euthanized two weeks post-injection, and lungs
were excised and processed for ﬂow cytometry using a mouse lung
dissociation kit according to the manufacturer ’s instructions (Milte-
nyi Biotec). The resulting single cell suspension was resuspended in
PBS/0.5%BSA/2 mM EDTA, and non-speci ﬁc antibody binding was
blocked with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (BD Pharmingen #553142)
at 1:100 dilution for 15 min at 4
/C14C. Cells were stained with ﬁxable
Live/Dead Blue to exclude dead cells, and antibodies speci ﬁc for the
following markers: CD31 (BV605, clone 390, BioLegend #102427),
CD45.2 (ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate, clone 104, BioLegend #109806),
CD11b (PerCP-eFluor710, clone M1/70, Invitrogen #46-0112-80) at
a 1:100 dilution for 45 min at 4
/C14C. Flow cytometry was performed
on an LSRII (BD Biosciences) instrument, and data analyzed using
FloJo software (v10, BD Biosciences).
To assess cell transduction in hematopoietic lineages, whole blood
and bone marrow were collected from Ai9 mice injected with
1E+12 GC/mouse. Leg bones were kept cold in 1 /C2PBS in 12-well
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1295


--- Page 15 ---

plates on ice. Bones were crushed with mortar and pestle and rinsed
with AutoMACS buffer (Miltenyi Cat# 130-091-222) with BSA (Mil-
tenyi Cat#130-091-376) ( ﬁnal concentration of 0.5% BSA). Liquid
was ﬁltered through Falcon 32235 5-mL tubes with cell strainer. Cells
were centrifuged at 500 /C2g for 5 min and liquid decanted. Cells were
resuspended at approximately 2 /C210^7 per mL and 1 /C210^6 cells
were stained with either antibody cocktail BM-A or BM-B for
30 min at 4
/C14C. Samples were washed with PBS with 5 mM EDTA
and 0.5% BSA, stained with 10 mLo f5 mg/mL DAPI (BD Biosciences,
Cat.#564907).
Per 200 mL of sample and analyzed on BD FACSymphony A5 with
500K live cells set as stopping gate. Whole blood for white cells (pe-
ripheral blood lymphocytes- PBL) was treated with 3 mL 1 /C2Leinco
RBC Lysis buffer for 5 min at room temperature (RT), centrifuged for
5 min at 500 /C2g, decanted, resuspended with 3 mL 1 /C2RBC Lysis
Buffer for 5 min at RT, centrifuged for 5 min at 500xg, decanted,
washed with 4mL PBS with 5mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA, centrifuged
for 5 min at 500 /C2g, decanted, blotted on paper towel, and resus-
pended in a total volume of 50 mL for staining. We added 10 mLo f
PBL staining cocktail for 30 min at 4
/C14C, washed with 2mL of PBS
with 5 mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA, centrifuged for 5 min at 500/C2g, dec-
anted, resuspended in 200 mL of PBS with 5 mM EDTA and 0.5%
BSA, stained with 10 mLo f5 mg/mL DAPI, and run on the cytometer.
Samples were analyzed on BD FACSymphony A5 and data analyzed
using FloJo (v10, BD Biosciences).
Antibody staining panels for HSCs (HSC, BM-A), committed
lymphoid and myeloid progenitors (CLP/CMP, BM-B), and periph-
eral blood lymphocytes are listed in Table S7. Speciﬁc cell populations
were deﬁned by the following staining characteristics: long-term HSC
(CD150
+, Flt3/C0, CD48/C0), short-term HSC (CD150 /C0, Flt3/C0, CD48/C0),
MPP2 (CD150 +, Flt3 /C0, CD48 +), MPP3 (CD150, Flt3 /C0, CD48 +),
MPP4 (CD150/C0, Flt3+, CD48+), CMP (CD34 +, CD16/32 low), MEP
(CD34/C0, CD16/32 /C0), GMP (CD34 +, CD16/32 +), CD4 T cells
(CD4+, CD3e +), CD8 T cells (CD8a +, CD3e +), B cells (CD19 +,
B220+, CD3e /C0), eosinophils (Ly6G low, SSC +), CD11c + monocytes
(Ly6G/C0, Lyb6C /C0, CD11c +, SSC low), Ly6C + monocytes (Ly6G /C0,
Lyb6C+, CD11c-, SSC low), neutrophils (Ly6G +, SSC mid), and NK
cells (NK1-1+, Not T/NotB).
Statistical analysis
All possible pairwise comparisons (k = 45) of AAV serotypes, within
sex and organ (cell type), for each type of data (biodistribution, func-
tion transduction, functional transduction by ﬂow cytometry) were
performed using the pairwise.wilcox.test() function in package: stats
of R version 4.3.2. The p values were calculated by the exact method
unless there were ties, in which case, the function used the chi-square
approximation with continuity correction. Within each organ and
sex, p values were adjusted using the false discovery method.
80
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
All data and images associated with these studies are publicly available at https://scge.
mcw.edu/toolkit, as part of the Somatic Cell Genome Editing initiative.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was made possible by NIH grants U42 OD026645 to J.D.H., M.E.D., and
W.R.L.; U42 OD035581 to J.D.H., W.R.L., and C.J.W; U42 OD026635 to S.A.M. and
C.M.L.; and UG3 HL147367 to G.G. Additional support came from grants UG3
HL151545, R01 HL132840, and R01 DK124477 to W.R.L., grants R01DK136694 and
R56DK128098 to A.R.C., and grant K01DK128226 to M.A.-B. The Jackson Laboratory
Imaging Sciences and Flow Cytometry Cores receive support from the JAX Cancer Center
(P30CA034196). The BCM RNA In Situ Hybridization Core supported these studies and
receives funding from the Baylor College of Medicine Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities Center (IDDRC) (P50HD103555). This project was also supported by the
Cytometry and Cell Sorting Core at Baylor College of Medicine with funding from the
CPRIT Core Facility Support Award (CPRIT-RP180672), the NIH (CA125123 and
RR024574) and the assistance of Joel M. Sederstrom. Additional support was provided
by the Quantitative Science Shared Resource at BCM (P30CA125123). We also thank Ka-
zuhiro Oka and Austin Seal at the BCM Gene Vector Core for assistance with packaging
AAV4-Cre vectors. Funding to support the work was provided by grants awarded to
C.J.W., S.M.H., M.E.D., C.M.L., M.A.-B., J.D.H., S.A.M., G.G., and W.R.L.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The studies were conceived by W.R.L., J.D.H., C.J.W., D.W., G.G., C.M.L., K.J.S., and
S.A.M. in consultation with O.M. and other members of the NIH Somatic Cell Genome
Editing Consortium, and NIH program of ﬁcials. AAV vector design and production was
carried out by J.B., D.W., and G.G. Studies of biodistribution of AAV genomes were
conducted by C.J.W., A.E.M., M.D.G., and M.A.C. Studies of functional transduction
by ﬂuorescence were carried out by K.J.S., E.S., J.D., Y.G., S.H., S.A.M., and C.M.L. Addi-
tional sectioning and imaging was performed by M.C.L. Analysis of endothelial cell trans-
duction was carried out by C.J.W., M.D.G., M.A.-B., C.F.S., and M.C.L. Analysis of
pancreatic islet transduction was performed by A.R.C. and M.C.L. with support from
S.M.H. Expertise on confocal microscopy imaging provided by C.W.H. Generation of
experimental reporter mice was achieved by D.G.L. and J.D.H. Statistical analyses of
transduction data was performed by C.J.W. and S.G.H. The manuscript was written by
C.J.W., W.R.L., J.D.H., K.J.S., S.A.M., D.W., and G.G. with input and approval from all
authors. The content is that of the authors and is not intended to represent the of ﬁcial
views of the National Institutes of Health.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2025.
01.041.
REFERENCES
1. Pupo, A., Fernández, A., Low, S.H., François, A., Suárez-Amarán, L., and Samulski,
R.J. (2022). AAV vectors: The Rubik ’s cube of human gene therapy. Mol. Ther. 30,
3515–3541. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2022.09.015.
2. Wu, Z., Asokan, A., and Samulski, R.J. (2006). Adeno-associated virus serotypes: vec-
tor toolkit for human gene therapy. Mol. Ther. 14, 316–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ymthe.2006.05.009.
3. Rabinowitz, J., Chan, Y.K., and Samulski, R.J. (2019). Adeno-associated Virus (AAV)
versus Immune Response. Viruses 11, 102. https://doi.org/10.3390/v11020102.
4. Zinn, E., and Vandenberghe, L.H. (2014). Adeno-associated virus: ﬁt to serve. Curr.
Opin. Virol. 8,9 0–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2014.07.008.
5. Greig, J.A., Martins, K.M., Breton, C., Lamontagne, R.J., Zhu, Y., He, Z., White, J.,
Zhu, J.X., Chichester, J.A., Zheng, Q., et al. (2024). Integrated vector genomes may
contribute to long-term expression in primate liver after AAV administration. Nat.
Biotechnol. 42, 1232–1242. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01974-7.
6. Dalwadi, D.A., Calabria, A., Tiyaboonchai, A., Posey, J., Naugler, W.E., Montini, E.,
and Grompe, M. (2021). AAV integration in human hepatocytes. Mol. Ther. 29,
2898–2909. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.08.031.
7. Srivastava, A., Lusby, E.W., and Berns, K.I. (1983). Nucleotide sequence and organi-
zation of the adeno-associated virus 2 genome. J. Virol. 45, 555–564. https://doi.org/
10.1128/JVI.45.2.555-564.1983.
Molecular Therapy
1296 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 16 ---

8. Atchison, R.W., Casto, B.C., and Hammon, W.M. (1965). Adenovirus-Associated
Defective Virus Particles. Science 149, 754 –756. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
149.3685.754.
9. Geoffroy, M.C., and Salvetti, A. (2005). Helper functions required for wild type and
recombinant adeno-associated virus growth. Curr. Gene Ther. 5, 265 –271. https://
doi.org/10.2174/1566523054064977.
10. Rose, J.A., Maizel, J.V., Jr., Inman, J.K., and Shatkin, A.J. (1971). Structural proteins of
adenovirus-associated viruses. J. Virol. 8, 766 –770. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.8.5.
766-770.1971.
11. Snijder, J., van de Waterbeemd, M., Damoc, E., Denisov, E., Grinfeld, D., Bennett, A.,
Agbandje-McKenna, M., Makarov, A., and Heck, A.J.R. (2014). De ﬁning the stoichi-
ometry and cargo load of viral and bacterial nanoparticles by Orbitrap mass spec-
trometry. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 7295–7299. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja502616y.
12. Sonntag, F., Schmidt, K., and Kleinschmidt, J.A. (2010). A viral assembly factor pro-
motes AAV2 capsid formation in the nucleolus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107,
10220–10225. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1001673107.
13. Ogden, P.J., Kelsic, E.D., Sinai, S., and Church, G.M. (2019). Comprehensive AAV
capsid ﬁtness landscape reveals a viral gene and enables machine-guided design.
Science 366, 1139–1143. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2900.
14. Hermonat, P.L., Santin, A.D., De Greve, J., De Rijcke, M., Bishop, B.M., Han, L.,
Mane, M., and Kokorina, N. (1999). Chromosomal latency and expression at map
unit 96 of a wild-type plus adeno-associated virus (AAV)/Neo vector and identi ﬁca-
tion of p81, a new AAV transcriptional promoter. J. Hum. Virol. 2, 359–368.
15. Riyad, J.M., and Weber, T. (2021). Intracellular traf ﬁcking of adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vectors: challenges and future directions. Gene Ther. 28, 683–696. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41434-021-00243-z.
16. Loeb, E.J., Havlik, P.L., Elmore, Z.C., Rosales, A., Fergione, S.M., Gonzalez, T.J.,
Smith, T.J., Benkert, A.R., Fi ﬂis, D.N., and Asokan, A. (2024). Capsid-mediated con-
trol of adeno-associated viral transcription determines host range. Cell Rep. 43,
113902. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113902.
17. Gao, G., Vandenberghe, L.H., Alvira, M.R., Lu, Y., Calcedo, R., Zhou, X., and Wilson,
J.M. (2004). Clades of Adeno-associated viruses are widely disseminated in human
tissues. J. Virol. 78, 6381–6388. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.78.12.6381-6388.2004.
18. Kern, A., Schmidt, K., Leder, C., Müller, O.J., Wobus, C.E., Bettinger, K., Von der
Lieth, C.W., King, J.A., and Kleinschmidt, J.A. (2003). Identi
ﬁcation of a heparin-
binding motif on adeno-associated virus type 2 capsids. J. Virol. 77, 11072 –11081.
https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.77.20.11072-11081.2003.
19. Bell, C.L., Gurda, B.L., Van Vliet, K., Agbandje-McKenna, M., and Wilson, J.M.
(2012). Identiﬁcation of the galactose binding domain of the adeno-associated virus
serotype 9 capsid. J. Virol. 86, 7326–7333. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00448-12.
20. Kaludov, N., Brown, K.E., Walters, R.W., Zabner, J., and Chiorini, J.A. (2001). Adeno-
associated virus serotype 4 (AAV4) and AAV5 both require sialic acid binding for
hemagglutination and ef ﬁcient transduction but differ in sialic acid linkage speci-
ﬁcity. J. Virol. 75, 6884–6893. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.75.15.6884-6893.2001.
21. Summerford, C., Bartlett, J.S., and Samulski, R.J. (1999). AlphaVbeta5 integrin: a co-
receptor for adeno-associated virus type 2 infection. Nat. Med. 5,7 8–82. https://doi.
org/10.1038/4768.
22. Di Pasquale, G., Davidson, B.L., Stein, C.S., Martins, I., Scudiero, D., Monks, A., and
Chiorini, J.A. (2003). Identiﬁcation of PDGFR as a receptor for AAV-5 transduction.
Nat. Med. 9, 1306–1312. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm929.
23. Akache, B., Grimm, D., Pandey, K., Yant, S.R., Xu, H., and Kay, M.A. (2006). The 37/
67-kilodalton laminin receptor is a receptor for adeno-associated virus serotypes 8, 2,
3, and 9. J. Virol. 80, 9831–9836. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00878-06.
24. Dudek, A.M., Pillay, S., Puschnik, A.S., Nagamine, C.M., Cheng, F., Qiu, J., Carette,
J.E., and Vandenberghe, L.H. (2018). An Alternate Route for Adeno-associated
Virus (AAV) Entry Independent of AAV Receptor. J. Virol. 92, e02213-17. https://
doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02213-17.
25. Pillay, S., Meyer, N.L., Puschnik, A.S., Davulcu, O., Diep, J., Ishikawa, Y., Jae, L.T.,
Wosen, J.E., Nagamine, C.M., Chapman, M.S., and Carette, J.E. (2016). An essential
receptor for adeno-associated virus infection. Nature 530, 108 –112. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature16465.
26. Silveria, M.A., Large, E.E., Zane, G.M., White, T.A., and Chapman, M.S. (2020). The
Structure of an AAV5-AAVR Complex at 2.5 A Resolution: Implications for Cellular
Entry and Immune Neutralization of AAV Gene Therapy Vectors. Viruses 12, 1326.
https://doi.org/10.3390/v12111326.
27. Dudek, A.M., Zabaleta, N., Zinn, E., Pillay, S., Zengel, J., Porter, C., Franceschini, J.S.,
Estelien, R., Carette, J.E., Zhou, G.L., and Vandenberghe, L.H. (2020). GPR108 Is a
Highly Conserved AAV Entry Factor. Mol. Ther. 28, 367 –381. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ymthe.2019.11.005.
28. Biswas, M., Marsic, D., Li, N., Zou, C., Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza, G., Zolotukhin, I.,
Kumar, S.R.P., Rana, J., Butter ﬁeld, J.S.S., Kondratov, O., et al. (2020). Engineering
and In Vitro Selection of a Novel AAV3B Variant with High Hepatocyte Tropism
and Reduced Seroreactivity. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 19, 347 –361. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2020.09.019.
29. Wang, L., Bell, P., Somanathan, S., Wang, Q., He, Z., Yu, H., McMenamin, D., Goode,
T., Calcedo, R., and Wilson, J.M. (2015). Comparative Study of Liver Gene Transfer
With AAV Vectors Based on Natural and Engineered AAV Capsids. Mol. Ther. 23,
1877–1887. https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2015.179.
30. Huang, Q., Chan, K.Y., Tobey, I.G., Chan, Y.A., Poterba, T., Boutros, C.L., Balazs,
A.B., Daneman, R., Bloom, J.M., Seed, C., and Deverman, B.E. (2019). Delivering
genes across the blood-brain barrier: LY6A, a novel cellular receptor for AAV-
PHP.B capsids. PLoS One 14, e0225206. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0225206.
31. Zincarelli, C., Soltys, S., Rengo, G., and Rabinowitz, J.E. (2008). Analysis of AAV se-
rotypes 1-9 mediated gene expression and tropism in mice after systemic injection.
Mol. Ther. 16, 1073–1080. https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2008.76.
32. Lahey, H.G., Webber, C.J., Golebiowski, D., Izzo, C.M., Horn, E., Taghian, T.,
Rodriguez, P., Batista, A.R., Ellis, L.E., Hwang, M., et al. (2020). Pronounced
Therapeutic Bene ﬁt of a Single Bidirectional AAV Vector Administered
Systemically in Sandhoff Mice. Mol. Ther. 28, 2150–2160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ymthe.2020.06.021.
33. Lang, J.F., Toulmin, S.A., Brida, K.L., Eisenlohr, L.C., and Davidson, B.L. (2019).
Standard screening methods underreport AAV-mediated transduction and gene ed-
iting. Nat. Commun. 10, 3415. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11321-7.
34. Hillestad, M.L., Guenzel, A.J., Nath, K.A., and Barry, M.A. (2012). A vector-host sys-
tem to ﬁngerprint virus tropism. Hum. Gene Ther. 23, 1116–1126. https://doi.org/10.
1089/hum.2011.116.
35. Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H., Ng,
L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust and high-
throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain.
Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2467.
36. Rutledge, E.A., Halbert, C.L., and Russell, D.W. (1998). Infectious clones and vectors
derived from adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotypes other than AAV type 2.
J. Virol. 72, 309–319. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.72.1.309-319.1998.
37. Chiorini, J.A., Kim, F., Yang, L., and Kotin, R.M. (1999). Cloning and characterization
of adeno-associated virus type 5. J. Virol. 73, 1309–1319. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.
73.2.1309-1319.1999.
38. Chiorini, J.A., Yang, L., Liu, Y., Safer, B., and Kotin, R.M. (1997). Cloning of adeno-
associated virus type 4 (AAV4) and generation of recombinant AAV4 particles.
J. Virol. 71, 6823–6833. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.71.9.6823-6833.1997.
39. Gao, G., Alvira, M.R., Somanathan, S., Lu, Y., Vandenberghe, L.H., Rux, J.J., Calcedo,
R., Sanmiguel, J., Abbas, Z., and Wilson, J.M. (2003). Adeno-associated viruses un-
dergo substantial evolution in primates during natural infections. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 100, 6081–6086. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0937739100.
40. Gao, G.P., Alvira, M.R., Wang, L., Calcedo, R., Johnston, J., and Wilson, J.M. (2002).
Novel adeno-associated viruses from rhesus monkeys as vectors for human gene ther-
apy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 11854 –11859. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
182412299.
41. Davidoff, A.M., Ng, C.Y.C., Zhou, J., Spence, Y., and Nathwani, A.C. (2003). Sex
signiﬁcantly in ﬂuences transduction of murine liver by recombinant adeno-associ-
ated viral vectors through an androgen-dependent pathway. Blood 102, 480 –488.
https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-09-2889.
42. Pañeda, A., Vanrell, L., Mauleon, I., Crettaz, J.S., Berraondo, P., Timmermans, E.J.,
Beattie, S.G., Twisk, J., van Deventer, S., Prieto, J., et al. (2009). Effect of
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1297


--- Page 17 ---

adeno-associated virus serotype and genomic structure on liver transduction and bio-
distribution in mice of both genders. Hum. Gene Ther. 20, 908–917. https://doi.org/
10.1089/hum.2009.031.
43. Shen, S., Troupes, A.N., Pulicherla, N., and Asokan, A. (2013). Multiple roles for sia-
lylated glycans in determining the cardiopulmonary tropism of adeno-associated vi-
rus 4. J. Virol. 87, 13206–13213. https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02109-13.
44. Aschauer, D.F., Kreuz, S., and Rumpel, S. (2013). Analysis of transduction ef ﬁciency,
tropism and axonal transport of AAV serotypes 1, 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 in the mouse brain.
PLoS One 8, e76310. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0076310.
45. Brown, D., Altermatt, M., Dobreva, T., Chen, S., Wang, A., Thomson, M., and
Gradinaru, V. (2021). Deep Parallel Characterization of AAV Tropism and AAV-
Mediated Transcriptional Changes via Single-Cell RNA Sequencing. Front.
Immunol. 12, 730825. https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2021.730825.
46. Zhao, J., Yue, Y., Patel, A., Wasala, L., Karp, J.F., Zhang, K., Duan, D., and Lai, Y.
(2020). High-Resolution Histological Landscape of AAV DNA Distribution in
Cellular Compartments and Tissues following Local and Systemic Injection. Mol.
Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 18, 856–868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2020.08.006.
47. Piechnik, M., Amendum, P.C., Sawamoto, K., Stapleton, M., Khan, S., Fnu, N.,
Álvarez, V., Pachon, A.M.H., Danos, O., Bruder, J.T., et al. (2022). Sex Difference
Leads to Differential Gene Expression Patterns and Therapeutic Ef ﬁcacy in
Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA Murine Model Receiving AAV8 Gene Therapy. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 23, 12693. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012693.
48. Schuettrumpf, J., Liu, J.H., Couto, L.B., Addya, K., Leonard, D.G.B., Zhen, Z.,
Sommer, J., and Arruda, V.R. (2006). Inadvertent germline transmission of AAV2
vector: ﬁndings in a rabbit model correlate with those in a human clinical trial.
Mol. Ther. 13, 1064–1073. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2006.03.002.
49. Favaro, P., Downey, H.D., Zhou, J.S., Wright, J.F., Hauck, B., Mingozzi, F., High, K.A.,
and Arruda, V.R. (2009). Host and vector-dependent effects on the risk of germline
transmission of AAV vectors. Mol. Ther. 17, 1022–1030. https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.
2009.56.
50. Fonck, C., Su, C., Arens, J., Koziol, E., Srimani, J., Henshaw, J., Van Tuyl, A., Chandra,
S., Vettermann, C., and O ’Neill, C.A. (2023). Lack of germline transmission in male
mice following a single intravenous administration of AAV5-hFVIII-SQ gene ther-
apy. Gene Ther. 30, 581–586. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41434-022-00318-5.
51. Ferla, R., Alliegro, M., Marteau, J.B., Dell ’Anno, M., Nusco, E., Pouillot, S.,
Galimberti, S., Valsecchi, M.G., Zuliani, V., and Auricchio, A. (2017). Non-clinical
Safety and Ef ﬁcacy of an AAV2/8 Vector Administered Intravenously for
Treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VI. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 6,
143–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2017.07.004.
52. Jakob, M., Mühle, C., Park, J., Weiss, S., Waddington, S., and Schneider, H. (2005). No
evidence for germ-line transmission following prenatal and early postnatal AAV-
mediated gene delivery. J. Gene Med. 7, 630–637. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgm.718.
53. Couto, L., Parker, A., and Gordon, J.W. (2004). Direct exposure of mouse spermato-
zoa to very high concentrations of a serotype-2 adeno-associated virus gene therapy
vector fails to lead to germ cell transduction. Hum. Gene Ther. 15,2 8 7–291. https://
doi.org/10.1089/104303404322886138.
54. Johnson, M.C., Garland, A.L., Nicolson, S.C., Li, C., Samulski, R.J., Wang, B., and
Tisch, R. (2013). beta-cell-speci ﬁc IL-2 therapy increases islet Foxp3+Treg and sup-
presses type 1 diabetes in NOD mice. Diabetes 62, 3775 –3784. https://doi.org/10.
2337/db13-0669.
55. Gaddy, D.F., Riedel, M.J., Pejawar-Gaddy, S., Kieffer, T.J., and Robbins, P.D. (2010).
In vivo expression of HGF/NK1 and GLP-1 From dsAAV vectors enhances pancre-
atic ss-cell proliferation and improves pathology in the db/db mouse model of dia-
betes. Diabetes 59, 3108–3116. https://doi.org/10.2337/db09-1886.
56. Rehman, K.K., Trucco, M., Wang, Z., Xiao, X., and Robbins, P.D. (2008). AAV8-
mediated gene transfer of interleukin-4 to endogenous beta-cells prevents the onset
of diabetes in NOD mice. Mol. Ther. 16, 1409 –1416. https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.
2008.116.
57. Cheng, H., Wolfe, S.H., Valencia, V., Qian, K., Shen, L., Phillips, M.I., Chang, L.J., and
Zhang, Y.C. (2007). Ef ﬁcient and persistent transduction of exocrine and endocrine
pancreas by adeno-associated virus type 8. J. Biomed. Sci. 14, 585 –594. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11373-007-9159-1.
58. Wang, Z., Zhu, T., Rehman, K.K., Bertera, S., Zhang, J., Chen, C., Papworth, G.,
Watkins, S., Trucco, M., Robbins, P.D., et al. (2006). Widespread and stable pancre-
atic gene transfer by adeno-associated virus vectors via different routes. Diabetes 55,
875–884. https://doi.org/10.2337/diabetes.55.04.06.db05-0927.
59. Xiao, X., Guo, P., Shiota, C., Zhang, T., Coudriet, G.M., Fischbach, S., Prasadan, K.,
Fusco, J., Ramachandran, S., Witkowski, P., et al. (2018). Endogenous
Reprogramming of Alpha Cells into Beta Cells, Induced by Viral Gene Therapy,
Reverses Autoimmune Diabetes. Cell Stem Cell 22,7 8 –90. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.stem.2017.11.020.
60. Goldstein, J.M., Tabebordbar, M., Zhu, K., Wang, L.D., Messemer, K.A., Peacker, B.,
Ashraﬁ Kakhki, S., Gonzalez-Celeiro, M., Shwartz, Y., Cheng, J.K.W., et al. (2019). In
Situ Modiﬁcation of Tissue Stem and Progenitor Cell Genomes. Cell Rep. 27, 1254–
1264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.105.
61. Asokan, A., Conway, J.C., Phillips, J.L., Li, C., Hegge, J., Sinnott, R., Yadav, S.,
DiPrimio, N., Nam, H.J., Agbandje-McKenna, M., et al. (2010). Reengineering a re-
ceptor footprint of adeno-associated virus enables selective and systemic gene trans-
fer to muscle. Nat. Biotechnol. 28,7 9–82. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1599.
62. Grimm, D., Lee, J.S., Wang, L., Desai, T., Akache, B., Storm, T.A., and Kay, M.A.
(2008). In vitro and in vivo
gene therapy vector evolution via multispecies inter-
breeding and retargeting of adeno-associated viruses. J. Virol. 82, 5887 –5911.
https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00254-08.
63. Pekrun, K., De Alencastro, G., Luo, Q.J., Liu, J., Kim, Y., Nygaard, S., Galivo, F.,
Zhang, F., Song, R., Tiffany, M.R., et al. (2019). Using a barcoded AAV capsid library
to select for clinically relevant gene therapy vectors. JCI Insight 4, e131610. https://
doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.131610.
64. Deverman, B.E., Pravdo, P.L., Simpson, B.P., Kumar, S.R., Chan, K.Y., Banerjee, A.,
Wu, W.L., Yang, B., Huber, N., Pasca, S.P., and Gradinaru, V. (2016). Cre-dependent
selection yields AAV variants for widespread gene transfer to the adult brain. Nat.
Biotechnol. 34, 204–209. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3440.
65. Nonnenmacher, M., Wang, W., Child, M.A., Ren, X.Q., Huang, C., Ren, A.Z., Tocci,
J., Chen, Q., Bittner, K., Tyson, K., et al. (2021). Rapid evolution of blood-brain-bar-
rier-penetrating AAV capsids by RNA-driven biopanning. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin.
Dev. 20, 366–378. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2020.12.006.
66. Maheshri, N., Koerber, J.T., Kaspar, B.K., and Schaffer, D.V. (2006). Directed evolu-
tion of adeno-associated virus yields enhanced gene delivery vectors. Nat. Biotechnol.
24, 198–204. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1182.
67. Perabo, L., Endell, J., King, S., Lux, K., Goldnau, D., Hallek, M., and Büning, H.
(2006). Combinatorial engineering of a gene therapy vector: directed evolution of ad-
eno-associated virus. J. Gene Med. 8, 155–162. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgm.849.
68. Lisowski, L., Dane, A.P., Chu, K., Zhang, Y., Cunningham, S.C., Wilson, E.M.,
Nygaard, S., Grompe, M., Alexander, I.E., and Kay, M.A. (2014). Selection and eval-
uation of clinically relevant AAV variants in a xenograft liver model. Nature 506,
382–386. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12875.
69. Paulk, N.K., Pekrun, K., Zhu, E., Nygaard, S., Li, B., Xu, J., Chu, K., Leborgne, C.,
Dane, A.P., Haft, A., et al. (2018). Bioengineered AAV Capsids with Combined
High Human Liver Transduction In Vivo and Unique Humoral Seroreactivity.
Mol. Ther. 26, 289–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2017.09.021.
70. Chan, K.Y., Jang, M.J., Yoo, B.B., Greenbaum, A., Ravi, N., Wu, W.L., Sánchez-
Guardado, L., Lois, C., Mazmanian, S.K., Deverman, B.E., and Gradinaru, V.
(2017). Engineered AAVs for ef ﬁcient noninvasive gene delivery to the central and
peripheral nervous systems. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 1172 –1179. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn.4593.
71. Weinmann, J., Weis, S., Sippel, J., Tulalamba, W., Remes, A., El Andari, J., Herrmann,
A.K., Pham, Q.H., Borowski, C., Hille, S., et al. (2020). Identi ﬁcation of a myotropic
AAV by massively parallel in vivo evaluation of barcoded capsid variants. Nat.
Commun. 11, 5432. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19230-w.
72. Tabebordbar, M., Lagerborg, K.A., Stanton, A., King, E.M., Ye, S., Tellez, L.,
Krunnfusz, A., Tavakoli, S., Widrick, J.J., Messemer, K.A., et al. (2021). Directed evo-
lution of a family of AAV capsid variants enabling potent muscle-directed gene de-
livery across species. Cell 184, 4919–4938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.08.028.
73. Zinn, E., Unzu, C., Schmit, P.F., Turunen, H.T., Zabaleta, N., Sanmiguel, J., Fieldsend,
A., Bhatt, U., Diop, C., Merkel, E., et al. (2022). Ancestral library identi
ﬁes conserved
Molecular Therapy
1298 Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025


--- Page 18 ---

reprogrammable liver motif on AAV capsid. Cell Rep. Med. 3, 100803. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100803.
74. Pulicherla, N., Shen, S., Yadav, S., Debbink, K., Govindasamy, L., Agbandje-
McKenna, M., and Asokan, A. (2011). Engineering liver-detargeted AAV9 vectors
for cardiac and musculoskeletal gene transfer. Mol. Ther. 19, 1070 –1078. https://
doi.org/10.1038/mt.2011.22.
75. He, T., Itano, M.S., Earley, L.F., Hall, N.E., Riddick, N., Samulski, R.J., and Li, C.
(2019). The In ﬂuence of Murine Genetic Background in Adeno-Associated Virus
Transduction of the Mouse Brain. Hum. Gene Ther. Clin. Dev. 30, 169 –181.
https://doi.org/10.1089/humc.2019.030.
76. Wu, H., Zhao, A., Bu, Y., Yang, W., He, L., Zhong, Y., Yao, D., Li, H., and Yin, W.
(2024). Tropism of adeno-associated virus serotypes in mouse lungs via intratracheal
instillation. Virol. J. 21, 302. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12985-024-02575-9.
77. Barzi, M., Chen, T., Gonzalez, T.J., Pankowicz, F.P., Oh, S.H., Streff, H.L., Rosales, A.,
Ma, Y., Collias, S., Wood ﬁeld, S.E., et al. (2024). A humanized mouse model for ad-
eno-associated viral gene therapy. Nat. Commun. 15, 1955. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-46017-0.
78. Zengel, J., Wang, Y.X., Seo, J.W., Ning, K., Hamilton, J.N., Wu, B., Raie, M.,
Holbrook, C., Su, S., Clements, D.R., et al. (2023). Hardwiring tissue-speci ﬁc AAV
transduction in mice through engineered receptor expression. Nat. Methods 20,
1070–1081. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01896-x.
79. Bankhead, P., Loughrey, M.B., Fernández, J.A., Dombrowski, Y., McArt, D.G.,
Dunne, P.D., McQuaid, S., Gray, R.T., Murray, L.J., Coleman, H.G., et al. (2017).
QuPath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis. Sci. Rep. 7,
16878. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17204-5.
80. Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (2018). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B
(Methodological) 57, 289 –300. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy Vol. 33 No 3 March 2025 1299